{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf460
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue0;}
\deftab720
\pard\tx0\pardeftab720\ri1920\sl440\sa266

\f0\fs24 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 .     When the Trojans reached the ford across the Xanthus,\
     lovely swirling river born of immortal Zeus,\
     Achilles split them in two groups, chasing one\
     across the plain towards the city, where the previous day\
     Achaeans had fled in terror, when glorious Hector\
     had prevailed. Some Trojans fled back there in panic.\
     Hera sent fog in front of them to slow them down.\
     But half the Trojans were crammed in along the river,\
     trapped by its deep currents and its silver eddies.\
     They fell in there, making a huge commotion.                                        10\
[10]\
     The noise roared down along the rushing river banks                                       amplifying the din. Men thrashed around, back and forth,\
     as they were sucked down in the current screaming.\
     Just as fire drives flights of locusts to seek refuge\
     in some river, when the tireless flames attack them\
     in a sudden onrush and they sink below the water\'97\
     that\'92s how, faced with Achilles\'92 attacking charge,\
     a confused mass of chariots and men filled up\
     the deep and swirling waters of the river Xanthus.\
     Then divinely born Achilles left his spear                                                20\
     beside a tamarisk bush and jumped into the stream,\
     like an inhuman thing, armed only with his sword,\
[20]\
     his heart intent on killing. Turning in all directions,                                         he kept on striking. The men his sword slaughtered\
     cried out in terror. The water turned blood red.\
     Just as other fish swim off from a huge dolphin\
     filling safe corners of some sheltered harbour,\
     fearful because the beast eats all it captures\'97\
     that\'92s how Trojans huddled then, under hanging banks,\
     all along the stream edge of that murderous river.                                 30\
     When Achilles\'92 arms grew weary from the killing,\
     he plucked out of the river twelve young men alive,\
     as blood payment for the killing of Patroclus,\
     Menoetius\'92 son. He led them up onto dry land,\
     like stupefied fawns, tied their hands behind them,     \
[30]\
     using belts they wore around their woven tunics,                                              and gave them to his men to lead back to the ships.\
     Then he jumped in again, eager to keep killing.\
     But then Achilles met someone fleeing the river\'97\
     Lycaon, a son of Dardanian Priam,                                                            40\
     whom he\'92d captured once before in a night attack,\
     taking him against his will from his father\'92s orchard.\
     With his sharp bronze Lycaon had been cutting\
     young shoots from off a fig tree to make chariot rails.\
     He\'92d had the bad luck to meet godlike Achilles.\
[40]\
     That time, Achilles took him in his ship and sold him                                      in well-built Lemnos, where the son of Jason\
     had paid the purchase price. From there, E\'ebtion,\
     a friend and guest from Imbros, had ransomed Lycaon,\
     paying a huge sum, then sent him on to Arisbe.                                     50\
     He\'92d escaped from there in secret and gone home,\
     back to his father\'92s house. Once he returned from Lemnos,\
     for eleven days his heart enjoyed his friends.\
     On the twelfth, some god threw him back again\
     into Achilles\'92 hands, who was about to ship him,\
     against Lycaon\'92s wishes, down to dwell with Hades.\
     When swift-footed, godlike Achilles saw Lycaon\
[50]\
     totally unarmed, without his helmet, shield, or spear,                                      for he\'92d thrown these on the ground, exhausted\
     after he\'92d escaped the river, worn out and sweating                               60\
     in all his lower limbs, Achilles, much surprised,\
     spoke to his own courageous heart:\
                                                       \'93What\'92s this?\
     My eyes are witnessing something amazing.\
     Great-hearted Trojans I\'92ve just slaughtered\
     will rise again, up out of murky darkness,\
     if this man\'92s avoided death, returned like this,\
     after I\'92d sold him off in sacred Lemnos.\
     The grey sea, which holds many people back\
     against their will, hasn\'92t seemed to stop him.\
[60]\
     But come, let him taste my spear point. I\'92ll see\'97                         70            and in my heart confirm\'97if he\'92ll return,\
     as he\'92s just done, or if life-giving earth,\
     which keeps even strong men down, will hold him.\'94\
     That\'92s what Achilles thought, as he stood there waiting.\
     Lycaon, dazed with fear, approached Achilles,\
     eager to clasp his knees in supplication,\
     heart desperate to escape dark fate and evil death.\
     Godlike Achilles raised his long spear, prepared to strike.\
     But Lycaon, stooping down, slipped underneath the spear,\
     then clasped Achilles\'92 knees. Flying above his back,                              80\
[70]\
     the spear stuck in the ground, hungry for human flesh.                                     With one hand, Lycaon grabbed Achilles\'92 knee.\
     His other clutched the spear, refusing to let go.\
     He begged for mercy, addressing Achilles\
     with these winged words:\
                           \'93By your knees, Achilles,\
     I beg you to respect me as a suppliant.\
     Have pity on me. I claim that sacred right,\
     my lord, because it was at your table\
     I first ate Demeter\'92s grain the very day\
     you seized me in that well-built orchard.                                                90\
     You led me far from father and my friends,\
     then sold me off in sacred Lemnos. For me\
     you got the value of a hundred oxen,\
[80]\
     but I was ransomed for three times that price.                                                    It\'92s now twelve days since I reached Ilion,\
     after my ordeal. Once more, deadly Fate\
     has placed me in your hands. I do believe\
     Father Zeus must hate me, to give me to you\
     for a second time. My mother, Laotho\'eb,\
     daughter of old Altes, gave birth to me                                                    100\
     to live a shortened life. Altes rules over\
     war-loving Leleges, in steep Pedasus,\
     by the river Satnioeis. His daughter\
     married Priam, who has many other wives.\
     She had two sons. Now you\'92ll have slaughtered both.\
[90] You killed fine Polydorus with those men                                                           fighting at the front, when your sharp spear\
     sent him to die. Now death comes for me, as well.\
     I don\'92t expect to escape your hands this time,\
     since some god has guided me right to them.                                         110\
     But I\'92ll say one more thing\'97take it to heart\'97\
     don\'92t kill me. I\'92m not from the same womb\
     as Hector, the man who killed your comrade,\
     that kind and powerful warrior.\'94\
     So Lycaon begged for mercy from Achilles.\
     But the response he got was brutal:\
                                                  \'93You fool,\
     don\'92t offer me a ransom or some plea.\
[100]Before Patroclus met his deadly fate,                                                          \
     sparing Trojans pleased my heart much more.\
     I took many overseas and sold them.                                              120\
     But now not one of them escapes his death,\
     no one whom god delivers to my hands,\
     here in front of Ilion, not one\'97\
     not a single Trojan, especially none\
     of Priam\'92s children. So now, my friend,\
     you too must die. Why be sad about it?\
     Patroclus died, a better man than you.\
     And look at me. You see how fine I am,\
     how tall, how handsome? My father\'92s a fine man,\
     the mother who gave birth to me a goddess.                                  130\
[110]Yet over me, as well, hangs Fate\'97my death.                                             \
     There\'92ll come a dawn, or noon, or evening,\
     when some man will take my life in battle\'97\
     he\'92ll strike me with his spear or with an arrow\
     shot from his bowstring.\'94\
                                                               Achilles finished.\
     Then Lycaon\'92s knees gave way, his heart collapsed.\
     He let go of the spear and crouched there, both his hands\
     stretched out. Achilles pulled out his sharp sword and struck,\
     hitting him on the collar bone, beside his neck.\
     The whole two-edged blade sliced into him. Lycaon fell,                      140\
     lying face down on the earth. His dark blood flowed out\
[120]and soaked the ground. Achilles seized him by the foot,                                  \
     then flung him in the river, shouting out in triumph\'97\
     his words had wings:\
                                                 \'93Lie there, among the fish.\
     They\'92ll lick blood from your wound with no respect.\
     Your mother won\'92t set you on your funeral bed,\
     lamenting over you. No, Scamander,\
     the swirling river, will carry you away\
     to the broad lap of the sea. Many fish\
     will swim up to the darkly rippled surface                                     150\
     to eat white fat from Lycaon. So die,\
     all you fleeing Trojans, until we reach\
     that sacred city Ilion, with me there,\
     right behind you, fighting and killing you.\
[130]Your flowing river with its silver eddies                                                     \
     won\'92t help, for all those bulls you\'92ve sacrificed\
     all these years, all the sure-footed horses\
     you\'92ve thrown alive into its swirling pools.\
     No matter\'97you\'92ll suffer an evil fate,\
     till every one of you has paid in full                                                 160\
     for Patroclus\'92 death, for Achaea\'92s dead,\
     the men you slaughtered by our swift ships,\
     when I was not among them there.\'94\
     Achilles\'92 words enraged the heart in river Xanthus,\
     who wondered how he might stop godlike Achilles\
     from his slaughter and protect the Trojans from disaster.\
     Meanwhile, Peleus\'92 son, gripping his long-shadowed spear,\
[140]still eager to kill more, charged Asteropaeus,                                                     \
     son of Pelegon, born to the broad river Axius\
     and Acessamenus\'92 eldest daughter, Periboea.                                         170\
     The deep swirling river had had sex with her.\
     Achilles went at Asteropaeus, who stood there,\
     facing him, holding two spears. In his anger\
     at the slaughter of young soldiers in the battle,\
     whom Achilles kept butchering along the stream,\
     showing no pity, Xanthus then put fighting strength\
     into Asteropaeus. But when the two men\
     had approached each other, moving close together,\
     godlike Achilles was the first to speak:\
         [150]\'93Who are you that dares to come against me?                               180           \
     Where are you from? Children who confront me\
     leave their parents full of sorrow.\'94\
     The glorious son of Pelegon then said in reply:\
     \'93Great-hearted son of Peleus, why ask me\
     my lineage? I come from Paeonia,\
     a fertile country far from here, leading\
     Paeonians, men carrying long spears.\
     It\'92s now eleven days since I came here,\
     to Ilion. I\'92m born from Axius,\
     the wide-streaming river, whose waters                                         190\
     are the loveliest which flow upon this earth.\
     Axius fathered a famous spear man,\
     Pelegon, whose son they say I am.\
[160]But now, splendid Achilles, let us fight.\'94                                                    \
     In response to that speech from Asteropaeus,\
     godlike Achilles raised his Pelian ash spear.\
     But then Asteropaeus, an ambidextrous man,\
     threw two spears at once. One hit Achilles\'92 shield,\
     but did not break through. The gold, gift of a god,\
     had checked it. The other hit Achilles a glancing blow                          200\
     on his right arm at the elbow. Dark blood flowed out.\
     But the spear passed over him and struck the ground,\
     still eager to taste flesh. Then Achilles, in his turn,\
[170]threw a straight-flying spear at Asteropaeus,                                                      \
     hoping to kill him. But he missed the man, hitting\
     the high river bank, driving half that ash spear\
     deep in the ground. Drawing the sharp sword by his thigh,\
     Peleus\'92 son, enraged, went after Asteropaeus,\
     who was trying to pull the spear Achilles threw\
     out of the river bank with his huge fist. He failed.                                 210\
     Three times he shifted it in his frantic haste to grab it,\
     but three times he had to abandon the attempt.\
     The fourth time his heart was keen to bend and break\
     the ash spear of Achilles, but before he could,\
     Achilles himself charged in and took his life\
[180]with a sword thrust in the belly by the navel.                                                     \
     His guts fell out onto the ground. As he lay gasping,\
     darkness veiled his eyes. Jumping on his chest,\
     Achilles stripped his armour off, boasting aloud:\
     \'93Lie there. It\'92s hard to compete with children                                220\
     of the mighty son of Cronos, even though\
     you are descended from some river. You claim\
     your family stems from a broad flowing stream,\
     but I boast a family coming from great Zeus.\
     The man who is my father, Peleus,\
     son of Aeacus, rules many Myrmidons.\
     Aeacus came from Zeus himself, and Zeus\
[190]is stronger than rivers flowing to the sea,                                                   \
     so Zeus\'92 line is stronger than all those\
     descended from a river. Look beside you\'97                                    230\
     there\'92s a great stream there, but he can\'92t help you.\
     For there\'92s no way to battle against Zeus,\
     son of Cronos. Even lord Achelous\
     cannot equal him, nor the great power\
     of deep flowing Oceanus, from whom\
     all rivers, seas, fountains, and deep wells\
     derive their water\'97even Oceanus\
     is afraid of lighting from great Zeus\
     and his thunder when it crashes in the skies.\'94\
[200]Saying this, he pulled his bronze spear from the river bank.                240          \
     Achilles left the corpse of Asteropaeus\
     lying there in the sand, dark water lapping round him.\
     Fish and eels then went at him, nibbling and chewing off\
     the fat around his kidneys. Achilles moved away,\
     attacking the Paeonian charioteers still crouched\
     beside the flowing river, terrified once they\'92d seen\
     their best man butchered in that desperate conflict\
     on the powerful sword of the son of Peleus.\
     There Achilles killed Thersilochus, Mydon,\
     Astypylus, Mnesus, Thrasius, Aenius,                                                       250\
[210]and Ophelestes. Swift Achilles would have killed                                              \
     still more Paeonians, but the deep-flowing river,\
     in its anger, taking on a human form, called out,\
     speaking from a deep swirling pool:\
                                                   \'93Achilles,\
     you may be the most powerful of men,\
     but you\'92re inflicting too much damage here.\
     Yes, the gods are always there to help you.\
     And if Cronos\'92 son is now enabling you\
     to kill all Trojans, at least drive them off\
     far from my stream. Carry out your work\'97                                    260\
     this butchery\'97out there on the plain.\
     Now corpses fill my channels, I can\'92t let\
     my waters flow through anywhere to reach\
[220]the glimmering sea. I\'92m choking on the dead,                                            \
     while you keep up these harsh atrocities.\
     Come, you leader of your people, let me be.\
     I find your actions here astounding.\'94\
                                                                   In reply,\
     swift-footed Achilles then addressed the river:\
     \'93Divinely raised Scamander, it shall be\
     as you request. But I\'92ll not stop killing                                            270\
     these proud Trojans till I have them cornered\
     in their city and have tested Hector\
     in a fight, and he kills me or I kill him.\'94\
     Saying this, Achilles fell upon the Trojans,\
     like something superhuman. Then Scamander,\
     the deep-flowing river, cried out to Apollo:\
     \'93What\'92s happening, lord of the silver bow,\
[230]child of Zeus? You\'92re not following Zeus\'92 plans.                                        \
     He clearly told you to assist the Trojans,\
     to defend them until evening comes,                                               280\
     casting its shadows on the fertile farm land.\'94\
     The river spoke. Then famous spearman Achilles\
     jumped from the bank into the middle of the stream.\
     The river attacked him with a rising flood,\
     stirring all his waters into seething turmoil,\
     sweeping up many corpses crowded in the shoals,\
     men slaughtered by Achilles. Roaring like a bull,\
     the river hurled these bodies up onto the shore,\
     preserving in its lovely stream those still alive\
[240]by hiding them in deep wide pools. Around Achilles,                            290          \
     huge waves towered threateningly, beating down\
     his shield. The breaking waters pushed him backwards.\
     Achilles lost his footing. His hand reached out to grab\
     a large elm tree, fully grown, but the tree came loose,\
     roots and all, tearing the whole river bank away.\
     As it fell in the river, its thick branches blocked\
     that lovely stream, damming its flow. In terror,\
     Achilles scrambled up out of the raging waters,\
     trying on his swift feet to run out to the plain.\
     But the great god wasn\'92t done. With a dark wave,                                  300\
     he went after godlike Achilles, to prevent\
[250]the killing and to rescue Trojans from destruction.                                            \
     Peleus\'92 son ran off as far as one spear throw,\
     moving as fast as a black eagle plummets,\
     the hunting bird which is the strongest and the fastest\
     of all flying things\'97that\'92s how Achilles ran.\
     The bronze armour on his chest was clanging fearfully\
     as he swerved out from underneath the flooding river,\
     desperate to escape. But with a tremendous roar,\
     Scamander\'92s flood rushed on in pursuit behind him.                             310\
     Just as a man laying out a ditch from a dark spring\
     to his plants and gardens digs a water channel,\
     mattock in hand, removing what obstructs the flow,\
[260]and the water, as it starts to run, pushes aside                                                   \
     the pebbles, and then, gaining momentum, flows down\
     and overtakes the man who\'92s guiding it\'97\
     that\'92s how the flooding wave kept clutching at Achilles\
     for all his speed, since gods have much more strength than men.\
     Every time swift-footed, godlike Achilles\
     tried stopping to fight back, to see if all the gods                                   320\
     who live in spacious heaven were forcing him to flee,\
     a tremendous wave from that heaven-fed river\
     would crash down around his shoulders. He\'92d jump clear,\
[270]heart panicking, but the river kept tugging at his legs                                       \
     with a strong undertow, washing out the ground\
     beneath his feet. Then gazing up into the wide sky\
     the son of Peleus cried out:\
                                             \'93Father Zeus,\
     why is no god standing by me here,\
     in this pitiful state, rescuing me\
     from this river? After this, I can endure                                           330\
     everything. I don\'92t blame any Olympian\
     as much as I blame my own dear mother,\
     who led me astray with lies, telling me\
     I\'92d die from the swift arrows of Apollo,\
     under Trojan walls and fully armed.\
     Now I wish that I\'92d been killed by Hector,\
     the best man of those native to this region.\
[280]Then a fine man would have done the killing,                                           \
     another fine man would have been destroyed.\
     But now it\'92s been ordained that I\'92m to suffer                                 340\
     an ignoble death, caught by this great river,\
     like some child in care of pigs, swept away\
     while trying to cross a torrent in a rain storm.\'94\
     Achilles spoke. Then Poseidon and Pallas Athena,\
     coming up quickly, stood in human form beside him.\
     They joined their hands with his, and with their words\
     they pledged their help. Poseidon spoke out first:\
                                                  \'93Son of Peleus,\
     don\'92t be so afraid. You need have no fear.\
     We two come from the gods, here to help you\'97\
[290]me and Pallas Athena, and Zeus approves.                                     350           \
     It\'92s not ordained that you\'92re to die here,\
     killed by some river, which will soon recede,\
     as you will see. We have advice for you,\
     if you\'92ll listen. Don\'92t hold back your hands\
     in murderous warfare till you\'92ve cornered\
     inside the famous walls of Troy those men\
     now in retreat before you. Once you\'92ve taken\
     Hector\'92s life, return back to the ships.\
     We giving you a chance for glory.\'94\
     With these words, the two gods went away. Achilles,                           360\
     greatly moved by what the gods had said, set off,\
[300]running across the plain, now full of flooding water,                                         \
     with many lovely weapons of the slaughtered men\
     floating there among their corpses. As he went,\
     he raised his legs high, striving against the current.\
     The broad flowing river couldn\'92t slow him down,\
     once Athena had put great power in Achilles.\
     But Scamander did not hold his fury back,\
     growing even more enraged at Peleus\'92 son.\
     He raised himself up in a high-crested wave                                           370\
     and called out with a shout to Simoeis:\
                                                     \'93Dear brother,\
     let\'92s both together counter this man\'92s power,\
     since he\'92ll soon demolish Priam\'92s city.\
[310]Trojans will not stand up to him and fight.                                                \
     Come quickly. Help me. Fill your streams\
     with water from your springs. Whip up your torrents.\
     Then stand in a huge wave, raising a din\
     with rocks and tree trunks, so we can stop\
     this violent man, now in a conquering rage,\
     like some god. I don\'92t think his strength will help him,               380\
     or his beauty, or that lovely armour\'97\
     that will lie somewhere underneath the flood,\
     buried in slime. I\'92ll cover him in sand,\
     with an massive layer of silt on top,\
     beyond all measurement. I\'92ll hide him there\
[320]with so much mud, Achaeans will not know                                              \
     how to collect his bones. There where he\'92ll lie,\
     I\'92ll make him a tomb\'97he won\'92t need a mound\
     when Achaeans organize his funeral.\'94\
     Saying this, Scamander crested high against Achilles,                           390\
     then charged, seething with foam and blood and corpses.\
     The dark wave of the heaven-fed river rose, towering\
     above Achilles, about to overwhelm him.\
     But Hera, afraid for Achilles, cried out, fearing\
     the great, deep, swirling river would sweep him off.\
[330]She called out to Hephaestus, her dear son:                                                        \
                                                        \'93Rouse yourself,\
     my crippled child. We think that you\'92re a match\
     for swirling Xanthus in a fight. Come quickly.\
     Help Achilles with a giant outburst\
     of your flames. I\'92ll stir up some winds\'97                                         400\
     West Wind\'92s harsh sea blasts and white South Wind\'97\
     to whip on your destructive fires, so they may burn\
     dead Trojans and their weapons. You must go\
     along the river banks, burning trees,\
     attacking river Xanthus with your flames.\
     Don\'92t let him slow you down in any way,\
     not with gentle words or making threats.\
[340]Don\'92t check your fury till I tell you to.                                                         \
     I\'92ll give you a shout. Then you can pull back\
     your inexhaustible fire.\'94\
                                                           Hera spoke.                                             410\
     Hephaestus then prepared a prodigious blaze.\
     First it burned up all the plain, incinerating corpses,\
     the many bodies of men slaughtered by Achilles\
     scattered everywhere. The entire plain dried up.\
     The shimmering river waters were held back.\
     Just as at harvest time North Wind quickly dries\
     well-watered orchards, to the farmer\'92s great delight,\
     that\'92s how the whole plain then grew dry, as Hephaestus\
     burned up the dead. Then he turned his blazing flames\
[350]against the river, burning elms, willows, tamarisks,                              420          \
     clover, rushes, sedge, all growing in abundance\
     along that lovely stream. In the river pools,\
     eels and fish were much distressed\'97they jumped everywhere\
     in that fine river, suffering the fiery blasts\
     prepared by that resourceful god Hephaestus.\
     The river, too, was burned. So Xanthus cried out,\
     calling to the god:\
                                    \'93No god, Hephaestus,\
     can stand against you. I can\'92t fight you\
     when you burn with flames like this. So stop.\
     End this strife. Godlike Achilles can continue.                               430\
     Let him drive the Trojans from their city.\
[360]What do I care about assisting in this war?\'94                                               \
     The river spoke, still burning from the fire,\
     his lovely waters seething. Just as a cauldron\
     with hot flames heating it boils inside and melts\
     the fat from off a well-fed hog, bubbling over,\
     once dry split wood is set down under it\'97that\'92s how\
     the fire burned that lovely stream. Its seething waters\
     would no longer flow downriver, held up there,\
     defeated by the power of that fiery blast                                                  440\
     made by the skill of god Hephaestus. Then the river,\
     with a strong appeal to Hera, spoke these winged words:\
     \'93Hera, why\'92s your son burning up my stream,\
     doing it more injury than any other?\
[370]I\'92m not as much to blame as all the rest,                                                     \
     the ones who help the Trojans. If you say so,\
     I\'92ll stop, if Hephaestus stops as well.\
     And I\'92ll swear this oath\'97never again will I\
     protect a Trojan from his evil death,\
     not even when all Troy itself is burning,                                         450\
     ablaze with all-consuming fire, started\
     by Achaea\'92s warlike sons.\'94\
                                        White-armed goddess Hera,\
     as soon as she\'92d heard this, spoke to Hephaestus,\
     her dear son:\
                    \'93Hold off, Hephaestus, splendid child.\
[380]It\'92s not right to hurt a deathless god like this,                                           \
     just for the sake of mortal men.\'94\
                                                            When Hera spoke,\
     Hephaestus extinguished his stupendous fire at once.\
     The river\'92s stream flowed once more in its channel.\
     When the fighting spirit in Xanthus had been broken,\
     the two gods fought no longer. Hera had stopped them,                       460\
     though she was still enraged. But now the other gods\
     began a heavy conflict and a cruel fight\
     among themselves. The spirits in their hearts\
     pushed them in various directions. As they clashed,\
     with a tremendous din, the wide earth cried out,\
     and mighty heaven pealed, just like a trumpet.\
     Sitting on Olympus, Zeus heard the sound\'97his heart\
[390]laughed with delight to see these gods go at it                                                   \
     in mutual conflict. They no longer stood aloof.\
     Shield-breaker Ares started it, attacking                                                  470\
     Athena first with his bronze spear and taunting her:\
     \'93You dog fly, why is it you\'92re once again\
     inciting gods to fight each other,\
     heart prompted by your own foolhardiness?\
     Don\'92t you recall the moment you provoked\
     Diomedes, Tydeus\'92 son, to wound me?\
     We all saw it\'97you grabbed his spear yourself\
     and drove it at me, scratching my fair skin.\
     Well, now I think you\'92ll pay for all you\'92ve done.\'94\
[400]Saying this, Ares struck Athena\'92s tasselled aegis,                                   480          \
     that fearful aegis which not even Zeus\'92 lightning\
     can overcome. Bloodstained Ares\'92 long spear struck it.\
     Drawing back, Athena picked up in her strong hand\
     a large, black, jagged rock, lying there on the plain.\
     In earlier ages men had set it there to indicate\
     the boundary of a field. With this rock Athena\
     struck raging Ares in the neck. His legs collapsed.\
     Ares fell. Stretched out he covered seven hundred feet.\
     His hair was dirtied with the dust. His armour rang.\
     Pallas Athena laughed, then cried in boastful triumph\'97                      490\
     her words had wings:\
                           [410]\'93You fool, still so ignorant                                                  \
     of how much stronger I can claim to be\
     than you, when you seek to match my power.\
     This is the way you\'92ll answer now in full\
     your mother\'92s vengeful rage. She\'92s angry,\
     planning nasty things for you, since you left\
     Achaeans to support the arrogant Trojans.\'94\
     With these words, she turned her glittering eyes away.\
     Zeus\'92 daughter Aphrodite then took Ares\
     and led him off by hand, as he kept groaning\'97                                      500\
     he found it difficult to get his spirit back.\
     When white-armed goddess Hera saw Athena,\
     she spoke, addressing her with these winged words:\
[420]\'93Look there, child of aegis-bearing Zeus,                                                    \
     you tireless one, that dog fly once again\
     is leading man-killing Ares through the crowd,\
     away from battle. Go after her.\'94\
     Once Hera spoke, Athena dashed off in pursuit,\
     delighted in her heart. Charging Aphrodite,\
     she struck her in the chest with her powerful fist.                                  510\
     Aphrodite\'92s knees gave way, her heart collapsed.\
     So both gods lay there, on the all-nourishing earth.\
     Athena then spoke out winged words of triumph:\
     \'93Let all those who assist the Trojans\
     end up like this in warfare with Achaeans,\
     with all the fortitude and boldness\
[430]Aphrodite showed in helping Ares,                                                              \
     standing up against my fighting power.\
     We\'92ll then soon end these hostile fights,\
     once we\'92ve destroyed well-peopled Ilion.\'94                                      520\
     As Athena spoke, white-armed goddess Hera smiled.\
     Then the mighty Earthshaker spoke to Apollo:\
     \'93Phoebus, why do we two stand aloof?\
     That\'92s not right, now that others have begun.\
     It would be shameful if we both went back\
     to Olympus, to Zeus\'92 bronze-floored home,\
     without a fight. Since you\'92re the younger one,\
     you must begin. It\'92s not fair play if I do,\
[440]since I\'92m your elder and thus I know more.                                                  \
     How foolish you are with your thoughtless heart!                        530\
     Don\'92t you recall the trouble we two had\
     around Troy, just the pair of us alone,\
     with no other gods, that time when Zeus\
     made us come here to work for a whole year\
     at a fixed wage for proud king Laomedon?\
     He was our master and told us what to do.\
     I built the Trojans a wide and splendid wall\
     around their city, to make it impregnable.\
     You, Phoebus, worked with his cattle herds,\
     taking his shambling bent-horned livestock                                  540\
     through Ida\'92s wooded spurs and valleys.\
[450]When the joyful seasons stopped our working there,                               \
     that despicable Laomedon robbed us.\
     He kept our wages and sent us off with threats.\
     He promised he\'92d tie up your hands and feet,\
     then in some distant island sell you as a slave.\
     He said he\'92d slice off both our ears with bronze.\
     We came back really angry in our hearts,\
     enraged about those promised wages\
     he\'92d withheld. That\'92s the man whose people                                  550\
     you\'92re now keen to favour. You don\'92t join us,\
     so we destroy these arrogant Trojans\
     once and for all, along with all their children\
[460]and their honourable wives as well.\'94                                                           \
     Lord Apollo, who shoots from far, answered Poseidon:\
     \'93Earthshaker, you\'92d never call me prudent,\
     if I fought with you over human beings\'97\
     those pitiful creatures are like the leaves,\
     now full of blazing life, eating nourishment\
     the earth provides, then fading into death.                                     560\
     No, let\'92s quickly end our quarrel, leaving\
     these mortal men to fight amongst themselves.\'94\
     Saying this, he turned away, thinking it shameful\
     to fight in battle against his father\'92s brother.\
[470]But his sister, forest goddess Artemis,                                                                 \
     queen of all wild beasts, was furious with him.\
     She spoke to him with scorn:\
                                            \'93So, far worker,\
     you\'92re running off, ceding total victory\
     to Poseidon, giving him an easy glory.\
     You fool! Why do you carry such a bow,                                          570\
     as useless as the wind? From now on,\
     I never want to hear you boasting,\
     the way you used to among deathless gods,\
     how you could fight Poseidon face to face.\'94\
     Artemis spoke. Far-shooting Apollo did not answer.\
     But Hera, Zeus\'92 honoured wife, was angry.\
[480]She went at the archer goddess, insulting her:                                                    \
     \'93You shameless bitch, you dare stand against me?\
     You\'92ll find it hard to match my power,\
     even if you have your bow and Zeus made you                              580\
     a lion among women, allowing you\
     to kill whichever one of them you please.\
     I say it\'92s better to be slaughtering wild beasts,\
     deer in the mountains, than to fight all out\
     with those more powerful. Still, if you\'92re keen\
     to learn about this war, to understand\
     how much more powerful I am, let\'92s fight,\
     since you are challenging my strength.\'94\
     With these words, Hera caught both arms of Artemis\
[490]in her left hand. With her right she grabbed the bow,                            590          \
     snatching it and its quiver off her shoulders.\
     Then she slapped her with those weapons. As she did so,\
     Hera smiled to see Artemis twist away and squirm.\
     The swift arrows tumbled out. Artemis ran off,\
     crying like a pigeon speeding from a hawk,\
     flying to some hollow cleft among the rocks,\
     for she\'92s not fated to be caught\'97that\'92s how Artemis\
     escaped, in tears, leaving her bow lying there.\
     Then Hermes, the guide, killer of Argus, spoke out,\
     addressing Leto:\
                                         \'93I\'92ll not fight you, Leto.                                           600\
     It\'92s dangerous to come to blows with those\
     married to cloud-gatherer Zeus. So you can tell\
[500]immortal gods your great strength conquered me\'97                                \
     and you can even boast about it.\'94\
                                                        Hermes finished.\
     Leto then collected the curved bow and arrows,\
     which had fallen here and there down in the swirling dust.\
     Then she left, taking her daughter\'92s weapons with her.\
     Artemis returned then to Olympus, to Zeus\'92 home,\
     with its bronze floor. The girl sat on her father\'92s lap,\
     her immortal garments shaking as she wept.                                          610\
     Her father, Cronos\'92 son, holding her to him,\
     asked her with a gentle laugh:\
                                                   \'93My dear child,\
     which of the heavenly gods has treated you\
[510]so nastily, as if you were committing                                                          \
     some evil act in public?\'94\
                                                         Then Artemis,\
     with her beautiful headband, answered Zeus:\
     \'93It was your wife who hit me, father,\
     white-armed Hera. Now, thanks to her,\
     immortal gods engage in fights and quarrels.\'94\
     As these two talked together in this fashion,                                          620\
     Phoebus Apollo went to sacred Ilion.\
     He was concerned about that well-built city wall,\
     afraid Danaans might breach it that very day,\
     contravening what Fate ordained. The other gods,\
     who live forever, went back to Olympus,\
     some incensed and others relishing their triumph.\
[520]They sat down by Zeus, lord of the dark cloud.                                                           \
     Meanwhile, Achilles still kept on killing Trojans,\
     both soldiers and their sure-footed horses, too.\
     Just as smoke rises up, reaching spacious heaven,                                  630\
     when a city burns from fires set by wrathful gods\'97\
     that\'92s how Achilles brought Trojans death and danger.\
     Then old Priam stood on that wall built by gods,\
     observing huge Achilles as he drove the Trojans\
     ahead of him in total panic, their spirit broken.\
     With a groan, he left the wall, came down to the ground,\
[530]and summoned the well-known sentries at the gates.                                       \
     \'93Hold the doors wide open with your hands,\
     until the fleeing troops come to the city.\
     For Achilles is coming closer, driving                                              640\
     them in panic. I think disaster looms.\
     When the men have gathered here inside the wall,\
     able to get relief, then close the gates,\
     these tight-fitting doors, once more. I\'92m afraid\
     this murderer may jump inside our walls.\'94\
     Then the men pushed back the bars, opening the gates,\
     and gave a saving light for those men on the run.\
     Then Apollo charged out to meet Achilles,\
     seeking to protect the Trojans from destruction,\
[540]as they ran back, straight for the high-walled city,                                 650          \
     suffering from thirst and dusty from the plain.\
     Still in a rage, Achilles chased them with his spear,\
     his heart filled with strong and unremitting fury,\
     still eager to win glory. At that moment,\
     Achaea\'92s sons would have captured Troy\'92s high gates,\
     if Phoebus Apollo had not intervened,\
     by stirring up noble, godlike Agenor,\
     Antenor\'92s son, a powerful warrior. In his heart\
     Apollo instilled courage and then stood by him,\
     leaning against the oak tree, covered in thick mist,\
     so he might ward off the heavy hand of Death.                                       660\
[550]When Agenor saw Achilles, sacker of cities,                                                        \
     he made a stand, his heart pondering many things,\
     as he stood there. In his agitation, he spoke out,\
     addressing his proud heart:\
                              \'93Here\'92s trouble!\
     If I rush away before Achilles\
     where other men are running in their panic,\
     he\'92ll catch me, then kill me as a coward.\
     But what if I let Achilles, son of Peleus,\
     drive them on, then dash away myself                                            670\
     to some other place, distant from the wall,\
     out in the Trojan plain, until I reach\
     Ida\'92s spurs, where there\'92s a bush to hide in?\
[560]When evening comes, I could wash in the river,                                        \
     get rid of all the sweat and then go back,\
     return to Ilion. But why\'92s my fond heart\
     debating all these options? He might see me,\
     as I moved off from the city for the plain,\
     and catch me with a sprint of his swift feet.\
     I\'92d no longer have a chance to get away                                           680\
     from death, my fate. The man is really strong,\
     much more powerful than other men.\
     What if I go out to stand against him\
     before the city? My sharp bronze, I think,\
     can slice up his flesh, too. He\'92s got one life,\
     no more. And men say that he\'92s a mortal,\
[570]although Zeus, Cronos\'92 son, gives him glory.\'94                                            \
     Saying this, Agenor stood up straight and waited,\
     the heart within him prepared for war and keen to fight.\
     Just as a leopard emerges from thick undergrowth,                               690\
     to face a hunter, with no fear in its heart,\
     no hint of flight when it hears the baying hounds\'97\
     even if the hunter first hits it with his spear,\
     the wounded beast won\'92t lose its fighting spirit,\
     until it closes with him or is killed itself\'97\
     that\'92s how godlike Agenor, noble Antenor\'92s son,\
[580]refused to run before fighting Achilles.                                                                \
     Holding his round shield in front of him, he aimed his spear\
     directly at Achilles, then shouted out:\
              \'93Glorious Achilles, I\'92m sure you\'92ve set your heart                         700\
     on destroying the city which proud Trojans hold\
     this very day. What foolishness! Much pain\
     must still be suffered in that enterprise.\
     We who live in Troy are men with courage,\
     and there are lots of us. We\'92ll guard Ilion,\
     in front of our dear parents, wives, and sons.\
     Here you\'92ll meet your doom, though as a fighter,\
     you are so formidable and brave.\'94\
                                                                     Agenor spoke.\
[590]Then he threw his sharp spear from his massive hand.                                      \
     He hit Achilles on the shin, below the knee.                                           710\
     The spear did not miss its man. The armour on his leg,\
     newly hammered tin, gave out a fearful clang.\
     But the spear just struck the metal and bounced off,\
     without going through. The god\'92s gift had protected him.\
     Then Peleus\'92 son, in turn, went for godlike Agenor.\
     But Apollo didn\'92t let him win the glory there.\
     He snatched Agenor up, hid him in dense mist,\
     then sent him quietly away from battle.\
     After that, he led the son of Peleus astray,\
     far from Trojan soldiers. The far shooter tricked him,                           720\
     by standing right before Achilles\'92 feet, looking\
[600]exactly like Agenor. Achilles charged off                                                              \
     in pursuit, chasing Apollo out across the plain,\
     past wheat fields, turning him towards the river,\
     the deep, swirling Scamander. Apollo raced on,\
     only a little bit ahead, using his cunning\
     to trick Achilles with his pace, so he\'92d think\
     he could catch up. Meanwhile, the other Trojans\
     fleeing in confusion, came crowding in the city,\
     throngs of them, cramming the gates, happy to be there.                     730\
     They didn\'92t dare to wait outside the wall, to check\
     who made it back and who had perished in the fight.\
     They streamed into the city in an eager rush,\
     all whose legs and knees had brought them safely in.}