{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf460
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural\qc

\f0\fs24 \cf0 Book Two\
Agamemnon's Dream and the Catalogue of Ships          \

\i \
[Zeus sends a false dream to Agamemnon; Agamemnon reports the dream to his advisors and outlines a test of the army; Agamemnon urges his troops to go home; Odysseus restores order; Thersites insults Agamemnon; Odysseus deals with Thersites, reminds the men of Calchas' original prophecy; Nestor suggests a display of the troops; the Catalogue of Ships (list of the Achaean, Trojan, and allied forces)]\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\i0 \cf0           \
          Gods and warriors slept through the entire night.\
          But sweet Sleep did not visit Zeus, tossing and turning\
          over in his mind some way to honour Achilles,\
          by slaughtering many soldiers by the Achaean ships.\
          In Zeus\'92 heart the best idea seemed to be\
          to send out a wicked Dream to Agamemnon.\
          Calling the Dream, Zeus said these winged words to him:\
          \
          \'93Evil Dream, fly quickly to Achaea\'92s men,\
  [10] by their swift ships. Go to Agamemnon\'92s hut,                                                        \
          Atreus\'92 son. Report my words precisely. \
          Bid him quickly arm long-haired Achaean troops,\
          for now they\'92ll capture Troy, city of wide streets.\
          Immortal gods who dwell on Mount Olympus\
          no longer disagree about all this.\
          Hera\'92s entreaties have persuaded them.\
          Trojans can expect more sorrows, more disasters.\'94\
          \
          Zeus spoke. With these instructions, Dream set off,\
          quickly reaching Achaea\'92s fast ships and Atreus\'92s son.\
          He found Agamemnon resting in his hut,\
  [20] wrapped up in the sweet divinity of Sleep.                                                                             \
          Dream stood above his head, looking just like Nestor,                                                               \
          son of Neleus, of all the more senior men\
          the one Agamemnon held in special honour.\
          In that shape, divine Dream spoke to Agamemnon:\
          \
          \'93You are sleeping, son of fiery Atreus,\
          tamer of horses. But a prudent man,\
          one to whom people have given their trust,\
          who has so many things to think about,\
          shouldn\'92t sleep all night. So pay attention.\
  [30] Hear what I have to say. I come to you                                     \
          as Zeus\'92 messenger, with his orders.\
          He\'92s far off, but pities and cares for you.\
          He bids you quickly arm long-haired Achaeans,\
          for now you can take Troy, city of wide streets.\
          The immortal gods who dwell on Mount Olympus                                               \
          no longer disagree about all this.\
          Hera\'92s entreaties have persuaded them.\
          Trojans can expect from Zeus more sorrows,\
          more disasters. Remember what I\'92ve said.\
  [40] Don\'92t let forgetfulness seize your mind,                                                            \
          when honey Sleep has loosed his sweet grip on you.\'94\
          \
          This said, Dream went off, leaving the king imagining things\
          which would not come to pass. He thought he\'92d take Troy,\
          Priam\'92s city, that very day. Fool! He had no clue\
          of what Zeus really meant, his plan to load on them,\
          Trojans and Danaans both, still more suffering,\
          more cries of sorrow, through war\'92s brutality.                                                                                    \
          \
          Agamemnon roused himself from sleep, the divine voice\
          all round him still. He sat up, pulled on a supple tunic,\
  [50] new and finely made. On top he threw a large cloak.                                                 \
          He laced up lovely sandals over his sleek feet\
          and slung a silver-studded sword around both shoulders.\
          He took with him the royal staff of his ancestors,\
          eternal and imperishable. Gripping this,\
          he approached the ships of the bronze-armed Achaeans.\
          \
          When goddess Dawn rose high up on Olympus,\
          bringing light to Zeus and the immortals,\
          Agamemnon bid the loud-voiced heralds summon                                                                      \
          all the long-haired Achaeans to assembly.\
  [60] Such a call went out. Men answered on the run.                                                             \
          But first, Agamemnon convened a meeting\
          of all his great-hearted senior counsellors.\
          They met by Nestor\'92s ships, king born on Pylos.\
          To the assembled group Agamemnon then sketched out\
          a plan he had conceived\'97a devious one.\
          \
          \'93My friends, listen.\
          A divine Dream has just come to me,\
          through the sacred night, as I lay asleep,\
          in form, size, and voice just like worthy Nestor.\
          He stood above my head and spoke these words:\
          \
 [70] \'91You are sleeping, son of fiery Atreus,                                                                        \
          tamer of horses. But a prudent man,\
          one to whom people have given their trust,\
          who has so many things to think about,\
          shouldn\'92t sleep all night. So pay attention.\
          Hear what I have to say. I come to you\
          as Zeus\'92 messenger, with his orders.\
          He\'92s far off, but pities and cares for you.\
          He bids you quickly arm long-haired Achaeans,\
          for now you can take Troy, city of wide streets.\
  [80] Immortal gods who dwell on Mount Olympus                           \
          no longer disagree about all this.\
          Hera\'92s entreaties have persuaded them.\
          The Trojans can expect from Zeus more sorrows,                                                    \
          more disasters. Remember what I\'92ve said.\'92\
          \
          With that, Dream flew off, sweet Sleep released me.\
          Come, then, let\'92s get long-haired Achaeans\
          somehow armed for battle. But first,\
          it\'92s only right I test the men, ordering them\
          to go home in their ships with many oars.\
  [90] You hold them back with your commands,                                                  \
          each one working from his own position.\'94\
          \
          Agamemnon finished speaking and sat back down.\
          Nestor stood up before them, king of sandy Pylos.\
          With a wise sense of their common cause, he addressed them:\
          \
          \'93My friends, chiefs and leaders of the Argives,\
          if any other Achaean had told us such a dream,                                                       \
          we would declare it quite false, dismiss it.\
          But now the man who has a claim to be\
          the greatest of Achaeans has witnessed it.\
[100] So come, let\'92s find a way to arm Achaea\'92s sons.\'94                                      \
          \
          So Nestor spoke. Then he began to make his way back,\
          leaving the council meeting. The others stood up,\
          all sceptre-bearing kings, following Nestor\'92s lead,\
          his people\'92s shepherd. Troops came streaming out to them.\
          Just as dense clouds of bees pour out in endless swarms\
          from hollow rocks, in clusters flying to spring flowers,\
          charging off in all directions, so from ships and huts                                                                \
          the many clans rushed out to meet, group after group.\
          Among the troops Rumour blazed, Zeus\'92 messenger,\
[110] igniting them. The assembly was in uproar.                                                                         \
          Beneath the men, as they sat amid the din, earth groaned.\
          Nine heralds shouted out instructions, attempting\
          to control the noise, so men could hear their leaders,\
          god\'92s chosen ones. Gradually men settled down,\
          kept quiet in their places. The noise subsided.\
          King Agamemnon stood up, hands gripping his staff,                                                              \
          one fashioned by Hephaestus\'92 careful craftsmanship.\
          That god had given it to lord Zeus, son of Cronos.\
          Later Zeus had presented it to Hermes,\
[120] the guide, killer of Argus. Hermes, in his turn,                                                                  \
          gave it to king Pelops, the chariot racer,\
          who passed the staff to Atreus, the people\'92s leader.\
          This man, as he lay dying, left it for Thyestes,\
          who owned many flocks. Thyestes, in his turn,\
          passed it onto Agamemnon, who held it\
          as ruler of all Argos and many islands.\
          With this staff as his support, Agamemnon spoke:\
          \
          \'93You Danaan warriors, comrades,                                                                                          \
          companions of Ares, god of war,\
[130] Zeus, son of Cronos, has entangled me                                     \
          in some really serious foolishness.\
          Perverse Zeus! He promised me, he agreed\'97\
          I\'92d have devastated well-built Troy\
          before going home. Now he plans a cruel trick,\
          tells me to return to Argos dishonoured,\
          after I\'92ve lost so many warriors.\
          This is apparently what high Zeus desires,\
          he who has smashed so many city heights,\
          and will destroy still more, such is his power,\
[140] the greatest power of all. This is a great disgrace,                                  \
          which people will learn about in years to come\'97\
          how an Achaean force of such quality and size                                                        \
          vainly sailed off to fight a lesser force,\
          and failed to get what they set out to take.\
          For if we Achaeans and the Trojans wished,\
          in good faith, to draw up a treaty,\
          to tally up the numbers on both sides,\
          with Trojans counting each inhabitant of Troy,\
          and if we Achaeans set ourselves in groups of ten,\
[150] then chose, for every group, a Trojan man                                \
          to pour our wine, then of our groups of ten\
          many would lack a man to act as steward.\
          That, I tell you, indicates just how much\
          Achaea\'92s sons outnumber Trojans,\
          those who live in Troy. But all their allies,                                                                       \
          warrior spearmen from many cities,\
          are a huge problem for me. They thwart my wish\
          to smash down those sturdy walls of Troy.\
          Nine of great Zeus\'92 years have rolled on past.\
[160] Ships\'92 planks have rotted, their ropes have frayed.                               \
          Back home our wives and children wait for us.\
          The work for which we came remains undone.\
          So come, let\'92s all agree to what I say.\
          Let\'92s go back to our own dear country in our ships.                                            \
          For we\'92ll not capture Troy with its broad streets.\'94\
          \
          So Agamemnon spoke. Among the soldiers,\
          all those with no idea of what he\'92d planned,\
          men\'92s feelings quickened. The assembly was aroused.\
          Just like huge ocean waves on the Icarian Sea,\
[170] when East Wind and South Wind rush down together                           \
          from Father Zeus\'92 clouds to whip up the sea,\
          the whole assembly rippled, like a large grain field,\
          undulating under the fury of the storm,\
          as West Wind roars in with force, all ears of corn\
          ducking down under the power of the gusts\'97\
          that\'92s how the shouting men stampeded to their ships.                                                         \
          From underneath their feet a dust cloud rose.\
          They yelled orders to each other to grab the ships,\
          drag them to the sacred sea, clear out channels\
[180] for launching boats, knock out props from underneath,                                        \
          frantic to get home. Heaven echoed with the din.\
          At that point, the Argives might well have gone back\'97\
          contravening what Fate had proposed for them\'97\
          if Hera had not spoken to Athena:\
          \
           \'93Alas, unconquerable child of Zeus,\
          who bears the aegis, the Argives will flee,\
          go back home to their dear native land,\
          cross the wide sea, abandoning Helen,\
          an Argive woman, leaving in triumph\
[190] Priam and his Trojans. On her account,                                                                      \
          many Achaeans have perished here in Troy,\
          far from the homes they love. So now, come on,\
          go down to the bronze-clad Achaean troops,\
          use your persuasive power to stop the men\
          hauling their curved ships down into the sea.\'94\
          \
          So Hera spoke. Bright-eyed goddess Athena obeyed.\
          She sped off, raced down from Mount Olympus\'92 crest,\
          quickly reached Achaea\'92s swift ships, rushing to the spot\
          Odysseus, a man as wise as Zeus, was standing.\
[200] He\'92d laid no hand on his fast, black, well-decked ship.                                                     \
          His stout heart was filled with pain. Standing close to him,\
          bright-eyed Athena spoke to him:\
          \
          \'93Odysseus,\
          divinely bred, Laertes\'92 resourceful son,\
          so you are going to fly back home,\
          sail off to your own dear country.\
          You\'92ll leap into your ships with many oars,\
          and leave in triumph Priam and the Trojans,\
          abandoning Argive Helen, for whose sake\
          so many Achaeans have died here in Troy,\
[210] far from the homes they love. But come now,                                             \
          move around among Achaean soldiers.\
          Don\'92t hesitate. Persuade each man to stop                                                                    \
          dragging the curved ships down into the sea.\'94\
          \
          So Athena spoke. Odysseus knew her from her voice,\
          as she talked. Then he ran, shrugging off his cloak\'97\
          Eurybates, the herald, later picked it up,\
          a man from Ithaca, aide to Odysseus.\
          Odysseus went straight to Agamemnon, Atreus\'92 son,\
          took from him his imperishable ancestral staff.\
[220] Grasping this, he ran to the bronze-clad Achaeans\'92 ships.                                   \
          When he came across some king or prominent leader,\
          he\'92d confront him, telling him to hold his ground:\
          \
          \'93Friend, it\'92s not suitable for you to panic,                                                                  \
          as if you\'92re worthless. Take your seat instead.\
          Get other soldiers to remain in place.\
          You\'92ve no clear sense of Agamemnon\'92s plan.\
          Right now he\'92s testing all the army.\
          Soon enough he\'92ll punish Achaea\'92s sons.\
          Didn\'92t we all hear what he said in council?\
[230] In his rage he may harm Achaean troops\'97                              \
          passions run high in kings whom Zeus supports.\
          Their honour comes from Zeus the Counsellor,\
          who loves them.\'94    \
          \
          By contrast, when Odysseus\
          came across some common soldier yelling out,\
          he\'92d beat him with the staff, admonishing him:\
          \
          \'93My friend, take your place in silence. Stay put.                                                 \
          Listen to what others say, your betters,\
          you puny coward, useless in war or council.\
          Achaeans can\'92t all rule here as kings.\
[240] No good comes from having many leaders.                                                    \
          Let there be one in charge, one ruler,\
          who gets from crooked-minded Cronos\'92 son\
          sceptre and laws, so he may rule his people.\'94\
          \
          Odysseus moved throughout the army, calming things.\
          From ships and huts, soldiers rushed to reassemble,\
          echoing like waves of the roaring sea crashing on shore,\
          as Ocean thunders on. Men sat calmly in their places.                                                             \
          But a single man kept on yelling out abuse\'97\
          scurrilous Thersites, expert in various insults,\
[250] vulgar terms for inappropriate attacks on kings,                                                             \
          whatever he thought would make the Argives laugh.\
          Of all the men who came to Troy, he was the ugliest\'97\
          bow legged, one crippled foot, rounded shoulders\
          curving in toward his chest. On top, his pointed head\
          sprouted thin, scraggly tufts of hair. Achilles hated him,                                                      \
          as did Odysseus, too, both subject to his taunts.\
          But now Agamemnon was the target of his gibes.\
          The Achaeans, despising Thersites in their hearts,\
          were furious at him. But he kept shouting out,\
[260] aiming noisy insults right at Agamemnon:                                                                             \
          \
          \'93Son of Atreus, what\'92s your problem now?\
          What do you lack? Your huts are stuffed with bronze,\
          plenty of choice women, too\'97all presents\
          we Achaeans give you as our leader,\
          whenever we ransack some city.\
          Or are you in need of still more gold,\
          a ransom fetched by some horse-taming Trojan                                                      \
          for his son tied up and delivered here\
          by me or by some other Achaean?\
[270] Or do you want a young girl to stash away,                                                   \
          so you\'92re the only one who gets to screw her?\
          It\'92s just not fair that you, our leader,\
          have botched things up so badly for us,\
          Achaea\'92s sons. But you men, you soldiers,\
          cowardly comrades, disgraceful people,\
          you\'92re Achaean women, not warriors.\
          Let\'92s sail home in our ships, leave this man,\
          our king, in Troy here to enjoy his loot.\
          That way he might come to recognize\
[280] whether or not we\'92re of some use to him.                                                        \
          Now Agamemnon has even shamed Achilles,\
          a much finer warrior than himself,\
          stealing a prize, keeping it for his own use.                                                                   \
          Then there\'92s Achilles, no heart\'92s anger there,\
          who lets it all just happen. If he didn\'92t,\
          this bullying of yours, son of Atreus,\
          would be your last.\'94\
          \
          Thersites yelled out these insults\
          right at Agamemnon, the people\'92s shepherd,\
          abusing him. Noble Odysseus stood up quickly,\
[290] confronting Thersites. Scowling, he lashed out sternly:                                          \
          \
          \'93Shut up, chatterbox. You\'92re a champion talker.\
          But don\'92t try to have it out with kings,\
          all by yourself. Let me tell you something\'97\
          of all those who came to Troy with Atreus\'92 sons,\
          you\'92re the most disgraceful. So shut your mouth.                                                  \
          No more words from you abusing our kings,\
          seeking to sneak back home. How this war will end,\
          we\'92ve no idea\'97whether Achaea\'92s sons\
          will go back home successful or will fail.\
[300] You sit here, railing at Agamemnon,                                                                     \
          Atreus\'92 son, leader of his people,\
          because Danaan heroes have given him\
          so many gifts\'97but that\'92s a cheap insult.\
          So I\'92ll tell you how things are going to be.\
          If I find you being so foolish any more,\
          then let Odysseus\'92 head no longer stay\
          upon his shoulders, let him no longer\
          be called the father of Telemachus,                                                                                        \
          if I don\'92t grab you, rip off all your clothes,\
[310] cloak and tunic, down to your cock and balls,                                           \
          and beat you back to the fast ships in tears,\
          whipping you in shame from our assembly.\'94\
          \
          Saying this, Odysseus lashed out with the sceptre,\
          hitting Thersites hard across his back and shoulders.\
          He doubled up in pain, shedding many tears.\
          In the middle of Thersites\'92 back sprang up\
          bloody welts beneath the golden sceptre.\
          He sat down, afraid and hurt, peering around,\
          like an idiot, and rubbing away his tears.\
[320] The soldiers, though discontent, laughed uproariously,                                                   \
          saying to one another:\
          \
          \'93Comrades,\
          before now Odysseus has done good things\
          thinking up fine plans and leading us in war.\
          But that\'92s the best thing he\'92s done by far\
          to help the Argives, shutting up that rabble-rouser.\
          Thersites\'92 bold spirit won\'92t urge him on\
          to trash our kings again with his abuse.\'94\
          \
          That\'92s how the soldiers talked together. Then Odysseus,\
          destroyer of cities, rose up, grasping the sceptre.\
[330] At his side, bright-eyed Athena, looking like a herald,                                              \
          silenced troops, so Achaeans close by and far away                                                                    \
          could hear him and follow his advice. Odysseus,\
          bearing in mind their common good, spoke out:\
          \
          \'93Son of Atreus,\
          now the Achaeans wish to disgrace you,\
          their king, shame you before all mortal men.\
          They\'92re refusing now to keep their promise,\
          the one they all swore to while sailing here,\
          still on their way from horse-breeding Argos,\
          that oath that they\'92d return after we\'92d destroyed\
[340] Troy\'92s strong walls. Like widows or small children,                              \
          they\'92re whining to each other to go home.                                                                     \
          But going back demoralized is bad.\
          A man who spends one month aboard his ship,\
          away from his wife, becomes downhearted\
          when winter gusts and stormy seas confine him.\
          This is now the ninth revolving year\
          we\'92ve been waiting here, on this very spot.\
          So I don\'92t think that badly of Achaeans\
          in their frustration here by their curved ships.\
[350] Still, it\'92s shameful to go home with nothing.                                                \
          My friends, be patient, give us all more time,\
          until Calchas\'92 prophecy comes true or not.                                                                    \
          We all have kept in mind what he foretold.\
          You all are witnesses, the ones whom Fate\
          has not yet visited to carry off in death.\
          Not long ago, when our Achaean ships\
          gathered at Aulis, bringing disaster\
          for Priam and his Trojans, we sacrificed\
          on holy altars placed around a spring\
[360] hundreds of perfect creatures to the gods,                                                    \
          the immortals\'97underneath that tree,\
          a lovely plane tree, where bright water flowed.\
          And then a great omen appeared, a snake,\
          blood-red along its back, a dreadful sight,\
          a thing sent out by Zeus into the daylight.*\
          Out from under the altar that snake slithered,                                                          \
          darting for the plane tree, where there lay\
          tiny, new-born sparrows, eight fledglings,\
          huddled under foliage at the very top.\
[370] The ninth one was the mother of the batch.                                                \
          The serpent ate the infants, who screamed with fear.\
          The mother fluttered around here and there,\
          lamenting her dear chicks. The coiled serpent\
          snatched the crying mother by the wing.\
          Once the beast had gobbled up the sparrow\
          and her chicks, the god who\'92d made the snake appear\
          did something to it there for all to see.\
          Crooked Cronos\'92 son changed that snake to stone!\
          We stood there astounded at what we\'92d seen\'97                                                      \
[380] a horror desecrating the gods\'92 sacrifice.                                                            \
          Calchas at once spoke out in prophecy:\
          \
          \'91Long-haired Achaeans, why stand there so mute?\
          Counsellor Zeus has made manifest to us\
          a tremendous omen. It has come late,\
          and will take many years to be fulfilled,\
          but its fame will never die. Just as that snake\
          swallowed the sparrow\'92s brood, eight in all,\
          with the mother who bore them the ninth one killed,\
          so that\'92s how long we\'92ll fight them over there.\
[390] In the tenth year we\'92ll take Troy, wide streets and all.\'92                       \
          \
          That\'92s what Calchas said. Now it\'92s coming true.                                                       \
          So come on, all you well-armed Achaeans,\
          let\'92s stay, until we seize Priam\'92s great city.\'94\
          \
          At this speech Argives gave out an enormous cheer.\
          The ships on all sides resounded ominously,\
          as Achaeans roared out their endorsement of his words.\
          Then Nestor, the Geranian horseman, cried out:\
          \
          \'93Alas! In our assembly you\'92re all infants,\
          silly children, with no sense of war\'92s events.\
[400] What will happen to our agreements,                                                                  \
          the oaths we made? Let fire consume                                                                                 \
          our strategies, men\'92s plans, our treaties,\
          ratified with wine and handshakes, those things\
          we used to trust. For now we fight ourselves,\
          arguing like this. We can\'92t find any remedy,\
          though we\'92ve been sitting here for years.\
          Son of Atreus, you must maintain with force\
          your previous plan to lead the Argive troops\
          directly to the harsh demands of war.\
[410] And let those one or two be damned,                                                                  \
          the men who don\'92t think like Achaeans,\
          the few of them who yearn to go back home\'97\
          something they\'92ll find impossible to do\'97\
          before we learn the truth or falsehood\
          of what was promised by aegis-bearing Zeus.\
          For I assure you mighty Zeus nodded assent                                                               \
          on that very day the Argives put to sea,\
          bearing Troy\'92s destructive fate in their swift ships.\
          On our right hand, Zeus hurled down lightning bolts,\
[420] signs manifesting his good will to us.                                                                   \
          So let no man run off to get back home\'97\
          not before he\'92s had sex with some Trojan\'92s wife,\
          payment for Helen\'92s miseries, her cries of pain.\
          If any man is really keen to get back home,\
          let him just set hand to his well-benched ship,\
          he\'92ll come face to face, in plain view of all,\
          with death, his fate. You, my lord, think carefully\'97\
          think about what someone else suggests.                                                                        \
          Don\'92t simply throw out what I say to you.\
[430] Agamemnon, set men in groups by tribes and clans,                         \
          so clans encourage clans, tribes bolster tribes.\
          If you do that, if Achaeans all obey,\
          you\'92ll then recognize who\'92s good and bad\
          among your leaders and your men. Ranged like that,\
          the two groups will stand against each other.\
          You\'92ll then know whether failure to take Troy\
          stems from divine will or craven soldiers\
          or ineptitude in managing the war.\'94\
          \
          Mighty Agamemnon then answered Nestor:\
          \
[440] \'93Old man, in our assembly once again                                                \
          you win out over all Achaea\'92s sons.\
          O Father Zeus, Athena, and Apollo\'97\
          if I only had ten such counsellors\
          among Achaeans, king Priam\'92s city\
          would soon fall, be taken, sacked at our hands.\
          But aegis-bearing Zeus, son of Cronos,\
          keeps showering me with grievous troubles.\
          He throws me into pointless bitter fights.\
          So Achilles and I fought for that girl,\
[450] yelling at each other. The first fault was mine.                                          \
          But if we two agreed, were of one mind,\
          then Troy\'92s fate would be sealed without delay,                                                      \
          without a moment\'92s pause. But let\'92s go off to eat,\
          so we can resume the fight. Every one of you,\
          get your spears and shields prepared for action.\
          Feed your swift-footed horses properly.\
          Inspect the chariots with a careful eye,\
          so we can stand all day and battle Ares,\
          hateful god of war. We\'92ll get no respite,\
[460] not even for a moment, except at dusk,                                                             \
          when nightfall separates the frenzied soldiers.\
          Chest straps on our protective body shields\
          will be soaked through with sweat. Around our spears\
          hands will grow numb. Horses, too, will sweat,                                                        \
          under the strain of hauling polished chariots.\
          But if I see a man coming out to fight\
          reluctantly, hanging back by our curved ships,\
          he\'92ll not escape being food for dogs and birds.\'94\
          \
          Argives answered Agamemnon with a mighty roar,\
[470] like waves by a steep cliff crashing on the rock face,                                                   \
          lashed by South Wind\'92s blasts, always foaming on the rock,\
          whipped on by every wind gusting here and there.\
          The men leapt up, moved off, scattering to ships,\
          set fires by their huts, and each man ate his dinner.\
          Every man then sacrificed to the immortal gods,                                                                            \
          praying to escape death and war\'92s killing zone.\
          Agamemnon, king of men, sacrificed an ox,\
          a fat one, five years old, to Zeus, exalted son of Cronos.\
          He summoned the best senior men of all Achaeans\'97\
[480] first, Nestor and Idomeneus, then both Ajaxes,                                                                \
          then Diomedes, Tydeus\'92 son. Seventh came Odysseus.\
          Warrior Menelaus arrived without a summons,\
          knowing in his heart all Agamemnon\'92s worries.\
          They stood by the ox, with barley grains for sprinkling.                                                          \
          Then Agamemnon prayed on their behalf:\
          \
           \'93Most powerful Zeus,\
          exalted lord of thunder clouds, Zeus,\
          who dwells in heaven, grant my prayer\'97\
          May the sun not go down, nor darkness come,\
          before I have cast down Priam\'92s palace,\
[490] covered it with dust, destroyed its doors                                  \
          in all-consuming fire, and with my bronze sword\
          sliced to shreds the tunic on Hector\'92s chest.\
          May many of his comrades lie beside him,\
          face down on the ground, teeth grinding dirt.\'94\
          \
          So he prayed. But Cronos\'92 son did not grant his wish.\
          Zeus took the offering but increased their suffering.                                                                  \
          \
          Once the men had prayed, scattering barley grain,\
          they pulled back the beast\'92s head, slit its throat, flayed it,\
          sliced thigh bones out and hid them in twin layers of fat,\
[500] with raw meat on top. They cooked these on split wood,                                      \
          then placed the innards on spits in Hephaestus\'92 fire.\
          When the wrapped-up thigh bones were completely cooked,\
          and they\'92d tasted samples of the inner organs,\
          they chopped up the rest, arranged the meat on spits,\
          cooked it carefully, then drew it from the fire.\
          This work finished, the men prepared a meal and ate.                                                              \
          Each soldier\'92s appetite was fully satisfied\'97\
          all dined equally. When every man had eaten\
          as much food and drink as anyone could wish,\
[510] Geranian horseman Nestor was the first to speak.                                                         \
          \
          \'93Lord Agamemnon, son of Atreus,\
          king of men, let\'92s end our discussions now\
          and not postpone work given by the gods.\
          Come, let heralds of bronze-clad Achaeans\
          summon all the soldiers to assembly.\
          Let\'92s move together across the wide front,\
          rouse Achaea\'92s men with blood-lust for war.\'94                                                             \
          \
          Agamemnon, king of men, agreed with Nestor.\
          He ordered clear-voiced heralds immediately\
[520] to sound the battle call to long-haired Achaeans.                                                          \
          The call went out. Troops assembled on the run.\
          Around Agamemnon, kings nurtured by the gods\
          rushed to establish order. With them strode Athena,\
          her eyes glittering, holding up the aegis\
          her priceless, ageless, eternal aegis,\
          its hundred golden tassels quivering,\
          each finely woven, valued at a hundred oxen.\
          With this, she sped on through Achaean ranks,                                              \
          like lightning, firing soldiers\'92 hearts for war.                                                                                        \
[530] As she passed, she roused in men that hot desire                                   \
          to fight, to kill. At once she made each man feel war\
          far sweeter than returning home, finer than sailing\
          in the hollow ships back to his dear native land.\
          Just as an all-consuming fire burns through huge forests\
          on a mountain top, and men far off can see its light,\
          so, as soldiers marched out, their glittering bronze\
          blazed through the sky to heaven, an amazing sight.\
          \
          As many birds in flight\'97geese, cranes, and long-necked swans\'97                                 \
          in an Asian meadow by the flowing river Caystrios,\
[540] fly here and there, proud of their strong wings, and call,                                       \
          as they settle, the meadow resounding with the noise,\
          so the many groups of soldiers moved out then\
          from ships and huts onto Scamander\'92s plain.\
          Under men\'92s and horses\'92 feet the earth rang ominously.\
          Then they stood there, in that flowered meadow,\
          by the Scamander, an immense array,\
          as numerous as leaves and flowers in springtime.\
          Like flies swarming around shepherds\'92 pens in spring,                                                             \
          when pails fill up with milk, so the Achaeans,\
[550] a huge long-haired host, marched out onto that plain                            \
          against the Trojans, eager to destroy them.\
          Just as goatherds sort out with ease the wandering beasts,\
          all mixed up in the pasture, so through all the army,\
          the leaders organized the troops for battle.\
          Among them powerful Agamemnon roamed,\
          eyes and head like Zeus, who loves the thunder,\
          waist like Ares, god of war, chest like Poseidon.\
          Just as in cattle herds the bull stands out above the rest,                                                      \
          by far the most conspicuous amid the cows,\
[560] so on that day Zeus made Agamemnon stand                                         \
          pre-eminent among the troops, first of heroes.\
          \
          Now, you Muses living on Olympus, tell me\'97\
          for you are goddesses and know everything,\
          while we hear only stories, knowing nothing certain\'97\
          tell me the leaders of Danaans, the rulers.\
          It would be impossible for me to tell\
          the story of or name those in the common mass,\
          not even with ten tongues, ten mouths, an untiring voice,\
          a heart of bronze, unless the Olympian Muses,                                                                                 \
[570] daughters of aegis-bearing Zeus, could sing of the men,                                        \
          all those who came to Troy. But I shall list the leaders,\
          commanders of the ships, and all the ships in full.\
          \
          Peneleus, Leitus, and Arcesilaus\
          led the Boeotians, with Clonius and Prothoenor.\
          Their men came from Hyria, rocky Aulis,\
          Schoenus, Scolus, mountainous Eteonus,\
          Thespeia, Graia, spacious Mycalassus,\
          men holding Harma, Eilesium, Erythrae;\
          men holding Eleon, Hyle, Peteon,                                                                                                                     \
[580] Ocalea, the well-built fortress Medeon,                                                                                     \
          Copae, Eutresis, Thisbe, city full of doves;\
          men from Coronea, grassy Haliartus;\
          men from Plataea, Glisas, those who held\
          fortified Lower Thebe and sacred Onchestus,\
          with Poseidon\'92s splendid grove; men from Arne,\
          land rich in grapes, Midea, sacred Nisa,\
          and distant Anthedon. Fifty ships came with these men,\
          each with one hundred and twenty young Boeotians.                                                               \
          \
          Men from Aspledon and Minyan Orchomenus\
[590] were led by Ascalaphus and Ialmenus,                                                                                       \
          Ares\'92 sons. Astyoche bore them in Actor\'92s house,\
          Azeus\'92 son, to mighty Ares. She, a modest virgin,\
          went upstairs, where the god lay with her in secret.\
          These men brought with them a fleet of thirty ships.\
          \
          Schedius and Epistrophus, sons of Iphitus,\
          the son of great-hearted Naubolus,\
          commanded Phoceans\'97men from Cyparissus,\
          rocky Pytho, holy Crisa, Daulis, and Panopeus;                                                                                 \
          men from Anemorea and Hyampolis;\
[600] from around the sacred river Cephisus,                                                                                     \
          from Lilaea, beside Cephissus\'92 springs.\
          Forty black ships these two leaders brought with them.\
          Moving around, as soldiers armed themselves,\
          they set Phocean ranks by the Boeotians, on their left.\
          \
          The Locrians were led by swift Ajax, son of Oileus,\
          the lesser Ajax, not the greater Ajax,\
          son of Telamon, but a much smaller man.\
          Though he was short and wore cloth armour,\
          among all Hellenes and Achaeans he excelled                                                                                   \
[610] in fighting with his spear. Locrians came from Cynus,                                              \
          Opous, Calliarus, Bessa, Scarphe,\
          lovely Aegeiae, Tarphe, Thronion,\
          and from around the river Boagrius.\
          Ajax brought forty black ships of Locrians\
          living across from sacred Euboea.\
          \
          Elephenor, offspring of Ares, son of Chalcodon,\
          great-hearted leader, commanded the Abantes,\
          who live to breathe war\'92s fury, soldiers from Euboea,\
          Chalcis, Eretria, wine-rich Histiaea, Cerinthus by the sea,\
[620] men from the steep fortress Dium, Carystus, and Styra.                                         \
          These swift Abantes came with Elephenor,                                                                                           \
          their hair grown long behind, warrior spearmen,\
          filled with fierce desire to tear apart their enemies,\
          to pierce armed bodies with their long ash spears.\
          Forty black ships came with Elephenor.\
          \
          Soldiers came from that well-built fortress Athens,\
          land of proud Erechtheus, whom Athena raised,\
          after he was born out of the harvest land.\
          She placed him in Athens, at her own rich shrine.\
[630] To him Athenian youth make sacrificial offerings,                                                         \
          with bulls and rams as each year comes around.                                                                             \
          Menestheus, son of Peteos, led these men.\
          In tactics no one alive on earth could match him\
          for deploying chariots or shield-bearing men.\
          Nestor, from a previous age, was his only rival.\
          Menestheus brought with him fifty black ships.\
          \
          From Salamis Ajax commanded twelve ships.\
          He organized his men in their positions,\
          so they stood adjacent to Athenian ranks.\
          \
[640] Warriors from Argos, fortified Tiryns, Hermione,                                                           \
          Asine, both with deep bays, Troezene, Eionae,                                                                                 \
          vine-rich Epidaurus, Achaean youth from Aegina, Mases\'97\
          all these were led by mighty fighter Diomedes,\
          skilled in war cries, and by Sthenelus, dear son\
          of famous Capaneus. There was a third leader,\
          god-like Euryalus, Mecisteus\'92 son, son of lord Talaus.\
          But warlike Diomedes was the main commander.\
          These men brought with them eighty black ships.\
          \
          Troops from the strong fortress Mycenae, rich Corinth,\
[650] well-built Cleonae, Orneae, lovely Araethyrea,                                                                            \
          Sicyon, whose first king was Adrestus,\
          with men from Hyperesia, lofty Gonoessa,\
          Pellene, from Aegium, men from coastal regions\
          and wide Helice\'97of these men Agamemnon,\
          son of Atreus, led one hundred ships.\
          The most troops came with him, the finest men by far.\
          In their midst, Agamemnon put on a proud display,\
          dressed in gleaming armour, prominent among all heroes.\
          He was the best of all, because he had most men.                                                                         \
          \
[660] Men from Lacedaemon, land of ravines, Pharis,                                                               \
          Sparta, Messe, where doves congregate,\
          men living in Bryseae, beautiful Augeiae,\
          Amyclae, coastal Helos, men from La\'e4s,\
          from around Oetylus\'97all these in sixty ships\
          were led by powerful, warlike Menelaus,\
          Agamemnon\'92s brother. Among these warriors,\
          as they armed themselves some distance off,\
          Menelaus strode\'97confident, courageous\'97\
          rousing his troops for war, his heart passionate\
[670] to avenge Helen\'92s struggles, her cries of pain.                                                                             \
          \
          Men came from Pylos, lovely Arene, Thryum,\
          by Alpheus ford, well-built Aipy, Cyparisseis,\
          Amphigenea, Pteleum, Helos, Dorium,\
          where the Muses met the Thracian Thamyris,\
          and stopped his singing. He was coming back\
          from Oechalia, from the court of Eurytus the king.\
          He\'92d boasted his singing would surpass the Muses,\
          daughters of aegis-bearing Zeus, should they compete.\
          In their anger the Muses mutilated Thamyris,\
[680] taking away his godlike power of song,                                                                                      \
          and making him forget his skill in playing the lyre.                                                                      \
          Geranian horseman Nestor led these men\
          in a flotilla of ninety hollow ships.\
          \
          Men from Arcadia, from below steep mount Cyllene,\
          near Aepytus\'92 tomb, where men excel in combat\
          hand to hand, troops from Pheneus, Orchomenus,\
          rich in flocks, Rhipe, Stratie, windy Enispe,\
          Tegea, lovely Mantinea, Stymphelus,\
          Parrhasia\'97mighty Agapenor led these men,\
[690] Ancaeus\'92 son, in sixty ships. Many Arcadians                                          \
          came in every ship, skilled fighters. Agamemnon,                                                                           \
          king of men, had himself provided well-decked ships\
          for them to sail across the wine-dark ocean,\
          for these men lacked expertise in matters of the sea.\
          \
          Soldiers from Bouprasium, fair Elis, those parts\
          bounded by Hyrmine, coastal Myrsinus,\
          the rock of Olene, and Alesium\'97these troops\
          had four commanders, each with ten swift ships.\
          The many Epeians on board were commanded\
[700] by Amphimachus, son of Cteatus, and Thalpius,                                                                     \
          son of Eurytus, descended both from Actor.\
          Third leader was Diores, son of Amarynces.\
          Fourth was Polyxeinus, son of Agasthenes, Augeas\'92 son.\
          \
          Men from Doulichium, sacred Echinean islands,\
          living across the sea from Elis, were commanded\
          by warlike Meges, son of Phyleus, the horseman,\
          loved of Zeus. Phyleus, angry with his father,\
          moved to Doulichium. Meges brought with him\
          forty black ships in his flotilla.\
          \
          Odysseus led on                                                                                           \
[710] the Cephallenians, soldiers from Ithaca,                                                                                    \
          well wooded Neritum, Crocylea,\
          rugged Aegilips, from Zacynthus, Samos,\
          both those inhabiting the mainland\
          and those from cities on the facing shore.\
          Odysseus, as wise as Zeus, led these troops,\
          who came with him in twelve black ships.\
          \
          Thoas, son of Andraemon, led the Aetolians,\
          men from Pleuron, Olenus, Pylene,\
          coastal Chalchis, and rocky Calydon.                                                                                                            \
[720] Proud king Oeneus had no living sons,                                                                                      \
          and he himself was dead, as was fair-haired Meleager.\
          Thus, Thoas ruled alone. He brought forty black ships.\
          \
          Famous spearman Idomeneus led the Cretans\
          from Cnossus, fortified Gortyn, Lyctus, Miletus,\
          chalky Lycastus, Phaestus, Rhytium,\
          both populous towns, with other warriors\
          from Crete\'92s one hundred cities. Idomeneus,\
          famous for fighting with a spear, led these troops,                                                                        \
          along with Meriones, as skilled at killing men\
[730] as Ares, god of war. They brought eighty black ships.                                              \
          \
          Tlepolemus, son of Hercules, a huge brave man,\
          led nine ships of courageous troops, men from Rhodes,\
          split into three divisions\'97from Lindus, Ialysus,\
          and chalky Cameirus\'97all led by Tlepolemus,\
          famous spearman, born to Astyocheia\
          and mighty Hercules, who\'92d taken her from Ephyra,\
          by the river Selleis, after razing many towns                                                                                        \
          full of vital warriors. Once he\'92d grown up\
          in their well-furnished home, Tlepolemus killed\
[740] his father\'92s uncle, Licymnius, a well-loved old man,                                                    \
          a great fighter, too. At once Tlepolemus built a fleet,\
          assembled many men, and fled away. Other sons\
          and grandsons of great Hercules had threatened him.\
          He suffered badly, until he came to Rhodes,\
          whose people live in three groups split by tribes.\
          Zeus, who governs gods and men, loved them,\
          and so the son of Cronos blessed them with great wealth.                                                   \
          \
          Nireus brought three well-balanced ships from Syme.\
          The son of Aglaea and lord Charopus,\
[750] the handsomest of all Danaans who sailed to Troy,                                                      \
          after Achilles, who had no equal. But he was weak,\
          because he had few troops.                                                                             \
          \
          Men from Nisyrus,\
          Crapathus, Casus, Cos, Eurypylus\'92 city,\
          the Calydnian islands had Pheidippus and Antiphus,\
          sons of lord Thessalus, Hercules\'92 son, as leaders.\
          With them came thirty hollow ships.                                                                                                           \
          \
          All the troops from Pelasgian Argos, Alos,\
          men living in Alope, Trachis, from Phthia,\
          and Hellas, where lovely women live, men called\
[760] Myrmidons, Hellenes, Achaeans\'97these troops                                       \
          Achilles led in fifty ships. But their minds weren\'92t set\
          on the grim clash of war. They had no one to lead them.\
          Godlike Achilles, swift of foot, sat by his ships,\
          still angry over fair-complexioned Briseis, seized\
          from Lyrnessus after heavy fighting.                                                                                                             \
          Achilles had laid waste Lyrnessus and Thebe\'92s walls,\
          overthrown the spearmen Mynes and Epistrophus,\
          sons of lord Euenus, son of king Selepius.\
          Because of her, Achilles sat still grieving.\
[770] But soon enough he\'92d rouse himself again.                                                                            \
          \
          Troops from Phylace, flowering Pyrasus,\
          shrine of Demeter, Iton, where flocks breed,\
          Antrum by the sea, and grassy Pteleum\'97\
          brave Protesilaus had led these men, while still alive.\
          Now the black earth held him. In Phylace,                                                                                             \
          he left behind a wife to tear her cheeks in grief,\
          home half complete. Some Dardanian killed him,\
          as he jumped on Trojan soil, the first on shore,\
          far ahead of all Achaeans. His soldiers lamented\
[780] the loss of their chief, but didn\'92t lack a leader.                                                                  \
          Warlike Podarces, son of Iphicles, led them\'97\
          the man owned many flocks and was a young blood brother\
          to Protesilaus. But that great-hearted warlike soldier\
          was an older, better man. So these troops had a leader,\
          though they missed the noble one they\'92d lost.\
          Podarces brought forty black ships along with him.                                                                    \
          \
          Troops from Pherae by Lake Boebea, from Boebe\'efs,\
          Glaphyrae, well-built Iolcus\'97these came\
          in eleven ships, commanded by Eumelus,\
[790] Admetus\'92 well-loved son, born to him by Alcestis,                                                        \
          loveliest of Pelias\'92 daughters.\
          \
          Troops from Methone, Thaumacia, Meliboea,\
          and rugged Olizon, were led by Philoctetes,\
          the skilled archer, in seven ships, each with fifty men,\
          expert archers. But Philoctetes stayed behind on Lemnos,                                                  \
          the sacred island, in horrific pain, abandoned.\
          Achaea\'92s sons had left him there in agony,\
          wounded by a snake bite. He lay there in torment.\
          But soon the Argives by their ships would have reason\
[800] to remember him.* These soldiers missed their chief,                                               \
          but were now led by Medon, O\'efleus\'92 bastard son,\
          whom Rhene bore to O\'efleus, destroyer of cities.\
          So Medon was the one who set their ranks in order.\
          \
          Men from Tricca, rocky Ithome, Oechalia,\
          city of Eurytus, the Oechalian,                                                                                                                              \
          were commanded by two sons of Asclepius,\
          skilled healers, Podaleirus and Machaon.\
          They brought thirty hollow ships with them.\
          Troops from Ormenius, from the fount of Hyperea,\
[810] from Asterius, from Titanus with its white hilltops\'97                             \
          these men were commanded by Eurypylus,\
          fine son of Euaemon, in forty black ships.\
          Men from Argissa, Gyrtone, Orthe, Elone,\
          the white city Olo\'f6sson\'97these troops were led\
          by Polypoetes, a steadfast soldier,                                                                                                                    \
          son of Perithous, himself son to immortal Zeus.\
          That famous lady Hippodameia bore\
          Polypoetes to Perithous on that very day\
          he took revenge out on those hairy monsters,\
[820] and beat them from mount Pelion towards the Aithices.                                       \
          But Polypoetes was not the sole commander.\
          With him was Leonteus, a warlike man,\
          son of proud-hearted Coronus, Caeneus\'92 son.\
          With them they brought forty black ships.\
          \
          Gouneus brought twenty-two ships from Cyphus.\
          With him sailed the Enienes and Peraebians,\
          reliable fighting men from cold Dodona,                                                                                                  \
          who work by the lovely river Titaressus,\
          which empties its beautiful, flowing waters\
[830] into the Peneus. These do not intermingle                                              \
          with the silver stream of the Peneus,\
          but flow along on top of them, like oil.\
          For the Titaressus is a branch of the river Styx,\
          dread waters by which the most solemn oaths are sealed.\
          \
          Prothous, son of Tenthredon, led the Magnetes,\
          from the region round Peneus and mount Pelion,\
          where leaves are always trembling in the wind.\
          With him swift Prothous brought forty black ships.\
          \
          These men were leaders, rulers of the Danaans.                                                                                \
[840] Muse, tell me this\'97Which of them were the very best                           \
          of those who came over with the sons of Atreus?\
          \
          The best horses were those of Admetus, son of Pheres.\
          Eumelus drove them. As fast as birds, they matched\
          each other in colour, age, and height along the back.\
          Bred by Apollo of the silver bow in Perea,\
          both mares, they carried terror with them.\
          Of the men, by far the best was Ajax, son of Telamon,\
          but only while Achilles didn\'92t join in battle.\
          For Achilles was the better man by far.\
[850] The horses carrying Peleus\'92 son, man without equal,                                                          \
          were much better, too. But he stayed behind,\
          by his curved seaworthy ships, still enraged\
          at Agamemnon, Atreus\'92 son, the people\'92s shepherd.\
          His soldiers amused themselves beside the breaking sea\
          by throwing spears and discus or with archery.\
          Their horses stood near their chariots, browsing on lotus\
          and parsley from the marsh. Their masters\'92 chariots,\
          fully covered, remained stationed in the huts.\
          Missing their warlike leader, these troops strolled\
[860] here and there throughout the camp and did not fight.                                         \
          \
          The soldiers, like a fire consuming all the land,                                                                                \
          moved on out. Earth groaned under them, just as it does\
          when Zeus, who loves thunder, in his anger lashes\
          the land around Typhoeus, among the Arimi,\
          where people say Typhoeus has his lair.\
          That\'92s how the earth groaned loudly under marching feet.*\
          \
          Then wind-swift Iris came to Troy as messenger\
          from aegis-bearing Zeus carrying grim news.\
          Trojans had summoned an assembly by Priam\'92s palace gates.\
[870] There all had gathered, young and old. Standing by Priam,                                \
          swift-footed Iris spoke, sounding like Polites, Priam\'92s son.                                                  \
          He\'92d been stationed as a scout\'97fully confident\
          of his skill at running\'97at old Aesyetes\'92 tomb,\
          right at the top, waiting for the moment\
          Achaeans moved out from their ships.\
          Looking just like Polites, swift-footed Iris said:\
          \
          \'93Priam, old man, you always love to talk\
          about irrelevant things, as you did earlier\
          in peacetime. But now this war continues\
[880] relentlessly. I\'92ve gone to battle many times.                                                  \
          I\'92ve never seen an army like this one, so many men,\
          as numerous as leaves or grains of sand,                                                                           \
          coming across the plain to assault our city.\
          Hector, I call on you, on you above all, to follow\
          my instructions\'97the numerous allies here\
          in Priam\'92s great city all speak different languages\
          from far-scattered regions. So let each man\
          issue orders to the ones he leads,\
          let him now organize his countrymen,\
[890] then lead them out to battle.\'94                                                                                      \
          \
          Iris spoke. Hector understood her words.\
          Immediately he ended the assembly.\
          Men rushed to arm themselves. They opened up the gates.\
          Troops streamed out, infantry and horses. A huge din arose.                                           \
          In the plain, some distance off, a high hill stood by itself,\
          right before the city. People call it Batieia,\
          but the gods know it as the tomb of agile Myrine.\
          Here the Trojans and their allies marshalled forces.\
          \
          Hector of the flashing helmet, Priam\'92s son,\
[900] led out the Trojans. With him marched in arms                                      \
          the largest contingent, the finest men by far,\
          eager to get working with their spears.\
          \
          Aeneas, Anchises\'92 worthy son, led the Dardanians. \
          Goddess Aphrodite had borne him to Anchises.                                                                              \
          She had lain with him on the slopes of Ida.\
          But Aeneas was not their sole commander.\
          With him were Antenor\'92s two sons, Archelochus\
          and Acamas, extremely skilled in every form of war.\
          \
          Men from Zeleia, on mount Ida\'92s lowest slope,\
[910] wealthy Trojans, men who drink dark waters                                          \
          of the river Aesepus were led by Pandarus,\
          Lycaon\'92s worthy son, whom Apollo had taught archery.\
          \
          Soldiers from Adresteia, Apaesus, Pityeia,\
          steep Mount Tereia were commanded by Adrestus                                                                     \
          and Amphius in cloth armour, Merops\'92 sons from Percote,\
          who knew more of prophecy than anyone.\
          He gave his children orders to stay away from war,\
          which eats men up. They did not obey him.\
          Deadly black fates had called them on to battle.\
          \
[920] Troops from Percote, Practius, Sestos, Abydos,                                                                \
          holy Arisbe\'97these troops were led by Asius,\
          son of Hyrtacus, an important ruler.\
          Arius\'92s huge, tawny horses brought him\
          from Arisbe, from the river Selle\'efs.\
          \
          Hippothous led tribes of spearmen from Pelasgia,                                                                         \
          fertile Larisa, along with Pylaeus, offshoots of Ares,\
          sons of Pelasgian Lethus, Teutamus\'92s son.\
          \
          Acamas and warlike Peirous led the Thracians,\
          those men bounded by the Hellespont\'92s strong flow.\
          \
[930] Euphemus, son of god-nurtured Troezenus,                                                                       \
          son of Ceos, led Ciconian spearmen.\
          \
          Pyraechmes led archers from Paeonia,\
          from far off Amydon, by the Axius,\
          a broad flowing river, whose moving waters                                                                                         \
          are the loveliest on earth.                                                                              \
          \
          Pylaemenes,\
          a brave soldier, commanded Paphlagonians\
          from Enetae, where herds of mules run wild,\
          men from Cytorus, from around Sesamus,\
          those with fine homes by the stream Parthenius,\
[940] from Cromna, Aegialus, high Erithini.                                                                                         \
          Odius and Epistrophus led the Halizoni\
          from distant Alybe, where men mine silver.\
          Chromis and prophet Ennomus led the Mysians.\
          But Ennomus\'92 great skill in prophecy\
          did not allow him to evade his deadly fate.\
          Swift Achilles, descendant of Aeacus, killed him                                                                            \
          in the river where he slaughtered other Trojans.\
          Phorcys and noble Ascanius led up Phrygians\
          from far-off Ascania, men keen for war.\
          \
[950] Mesthles and Antiphus commanded the Maeonians.                                                 \
          Sons of Talaemenes, born to Gygaea,\
          a water nymph, they led Maeonians\
          from around the foot of Mount Tmolus.\
          \
          Nastes led the Carians, men with a strange language,\
          from Miletus, Phthires, with its wooded mountain,\
          Maeander\'92s waters and high peaks of Mount Mycale.\
          Nastes and Amphimachus, noble sons of Nomion                                                                          \
          were their leaders. Nastes went to war carrying gold,\
          like a girl. What a fool! His gold did not spare him\
[960] a wretched death. He died in the river,                                                                                      \
          at the hand of swift Achilles, descended from Aeacus.\
          Fiery Achilles carried off his gold.\
          \
          Sarpedon and noble Glaucus commanded Lycians,\
          from distant Lycia, by the swirling river Xanthus.}