{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf460
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural\qc

\f0\fs24 \cf0 Book Five\
Diomedes Goes to Battle          \
\

\i [Athena inspires Diomedes with special powers; Athena takes Ares from the battle; Achaean leaders kill many Trojans; Diomedes' special glory on the field; Pandarus hits Diomedes with an arrow; Athena restores Diomedes, who continues his battle frenzy; Aeneas and Pandarus move out against Diomedes; Diomedes kills Pandarus, wounds Aeneas; Aphrodite saves Aeneas; Sthenelus captures Aeneas' horses; Diomedes attacks and wounds Aphrodite, who returns to Olympus; Diomedes threatens Apollo; Apollo heals Aeneas; Sarpedon complains to Hector; the battle continues; Sarpedon kills Tlepolemus, but is wounded; Athena and Hera go down to the battlefield; Athena and Diomedes attack and wound Ares; Ares returns to Olympus]    
\i0     \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural
\cf0 \
          Then Pallas Athena gave Diomedes, son of Tydeus,\
          strength and courage, so among all Argives,\
          he\'92d stand out and win heroic glory.\
          She made his helmet blaze with tireless flames,\
          his shield as well\'97like a late star in summer\
          which shines especially bright, newly risen from its bath\
          in Ocean\'92s streams. Around his head and shoulders\
          the goddess put a fiery glow, then drove him forward,\
          right into the middle of the strife, the killing zone,\
          where most warriors fight.          \
\
  [10] Among the Trojans                                           \
          was a rich and honourable man called Dares,\
          priest of Hephaestus. He had two sons\'97Phegeus                                                                         \
          and Idaios\'97both very skilled in all aspects of war.\
          Moving forward in their chariot to the front,\
          these two charged Diomedes, who was on foot,\
          staying on the ground. When they were at close range,\
          Phegeus was the first to hurl his long-shadowed spear.\
          The spear point flew by Diomedes\'92 left shoulder\'97\
          it missed him. Tydeus\'92 son then threw his spear.\
  [20] The weapon did not leave his hand and miss the target.                                        \
          It hit Phegeus right between the nipples\
          and knocked him from his splendid chariot.                                                      \
          Idaios jumped out and ran off from his horses.                                                                                 \
          He didn\'92t dare protect his slaughtered brother\'92s corpse.\
          Even so, he wouldn\'92t have escaped black doom,\
          but Hephaestus saved him with a dark cloud cover,\
          so his aged father wouldn\'92t waste away with grief.\
          Tydeus\'92 son, great Diomedes, drove the horses off,\
          then gave them to his comrades to take back to the ships.\
  [30] When great-hearted Trojans saw those two sons of Dares\'97                  \
          one shunning battle, one dead beside his chariot\'97\
          all their hearts were stirred.          \
\
          Then Athena, eyes glittering,\
          took her brother, headstrong Ares, by the hand,                                                                            \
          and said to him:          \
\
          \'93Ares, Ares, insatiable man-killer,\
          destroyer of cities, why don\'92t we leave\
          Trojans and Achaeans to fight it out?\
          Father Zeus will make one group victorious.\
          Let\'92s withdraw, avoiding Zeus\'92 anger.\'94          \
\
          With these words, she led headstrong Ares from the battle,\
  [40] then sat him down by Scamander river bank.                                                                               \
\
          Danaans then began to push the Trojans back.\
          Each leader killed his enemy. First, Agamemnon,\
          king of men, threw huge Odius, chief of the Halizoni,\
          from his chariot. His spear first struck him in the back,                                                          \
          between the shoulder blades, as he turned to flee.\
          It drove clean through his chest. Odius pitched forward\
          with a thud, his armour rattling round him as he fell.\
          Idomeneus slaughtered Phaestus, son of Borus,\
          a Meonian, who\'92d come from fertile Tarne.\
  [50] With his long spear, skilful Idomeneus struck him                                  \
          in his right shoulder, as he climbed in his chariot.\
          Dreadful darkness came and gathered Phaestus in.\
          Those attending Idomeneus stripped the armour.\
          Then with his sharp spear Menelaus, son of Atreus,\
          killed Scamandrius, son of Strophius, a huntsman.                                                                      \
          Artemis herself had taught him how to shoot\
          every animal raised in the mountain forests.\
          But archer Artemis was no help to him then,\
          no more than was his expertise in archery,\
  [60] at which he\'92d been pre-eminent in former times.                                                           \
          For fine spearman Menelaus, son of Atreus,\
          caught him as he ran away in front of him,\
          hitting him in the back between his shoulder blades,\
          forcing the spear right through Scamandrius\'92 chest.\
          He fell head first. His armour rattled round him.          \
\
          Meriones then killed Phereclus, son of Tecton,\
          Harmon\'92s son, whose hands could make fine objects of all sorts.                                 \
          Pallas Athena had a special love for him.\
          He was the one who\'92d made well-balanced ships\
  [70] for Paris at the start of all the trouble,                                                                                         \
          bringing disaster on the Trojans and on Paris, too,\
          for he was ignorant of what gods had decreed.\
          Meriones went after Phereclus as he ran off,\
          hurled his spear straight into his right buttock.\
          The spear point pushed on through, below the bone,\
          piercing his bladder. He fell down on his knees,\
          screaming. Then death carried him into its shadows.          \
\
          Then Meges killed Pedaeus, Antenor\'92s bastard son.\
          Theano had raised him with all care, loving him                                                                              \
  [80] as one of her own children, to please her husband.                                                      \
          That famous spearman Meges, son of Phyleus,\
          coming up close, drove a sharp spear in his neck,\
          into the nape behind his head. The bronze point,\
          slicing under his tongue, smashed through his teeth.\
          He fell into the dust, jaws locked on the cold bronze.          \
\
          Eurypylus, Euaemon\'92s son, killed lord Hypsenor,\
          son of proud Dolopion, Scamander\'92s priest,\
          a man honoured by his people as a god.            \
          Eurypylus, Euaemon\'92s splendid son, caught him\
  [90] as he ran off in front of him. Going quickly after him,                                                          \
          Eurypylus struck at Hypsenor\'92s shoulder\'97\
          his sharp sword sliced off Hypsenor\'92s brawny arm.\
          The bloody limb fell on the ground. Then death\'92s black night,\
          all-powerful fate, moved in and stole away his sight.          \
\
          Thus these men kept toiling in the battle frenzy.\
          As for Diomedes, you couldn\'92t tell where he belonged,\
          whether among the Trojans or Achaeans.\
          For he rushed across the plain like a swollen river,\
          like a swift winter torrent bursting dikes\'97\
[100] no dam put in its wway can hold it back,                                                                                 \
          no barrier of fruitful vineyards check its current,                                                                            \
          as all at once it floods when storms from Zeus roar down.\
          It knocks aside all fine things built by farmers,\
          hard-working men. That\'92s how the son of Tydeus\
          drove the dense ranks of Trojans into mass confusion.\
          For all their numbers they could not contain him.          \
\
          Lycaon\'92s fine son saw Diomedes moving fast\
          along the plain, pushing Trojan ranks in front of him,\
          in complete disorder. He quickly bent his bow,\
[110] taking aim at Diomedes. He shot an arrow                                              \
          and hit him on his sculpted body armour, \
          in the right shoulder. The sharp arrow went in there,\
          kept going, and splattered blood down on the curving metal.                                         \
          At this Lycaon\'92s noble son gave out a noisy shout:          \
\
          \'93Come on, you brave horse-lashing Trojans.\
          For the finest of Achaeans has been hurt.\
          I don\'92t think he\'92ll long survive my arrow\'92s force,\
          if Apollo, son of Zeus, really was the one\
          who put it in my heart to leave Lycia.\'94          \
\
[120] That\'92s what Lycaon\'92s son cried out, boasting aloud.                                                   \
          But his sharp arrow hadn\'92t killed Diomedes,\
          who moved back to stand beside his chariot and horses.\
          He called to Sthenelus, son of Capaneus.          \
\
          \'93My friend, son of Capaneus, come on,\
          get down from the chariot, so you can pull                                                                   \
          this sharp arrow from my shoulder for me.\'94          \
\
          Diomedes spoke. Sthenelus jumped down on the ground.\
          Standing beside him, he pulled out the sharp arrow\
          stuck in his shoulder. Blood seeped through the woven shirt.\
[130] Diomedes, expert in war cries, then spoke this prayer:                                                       \
\
          \'93Hear me, Athena, unwearied daughter\
          of aegis-bearing Zeus. If you\'92ve ever\
          loved my father, stood by his side\
          in murderous combat, be my friend now.\
          Grant that I kill this man, that I come\
          a spear\'92s throw from the one who hit me\
          unexpectedly and now boasts about it,\
          saying I won\'92t see daylight for much longer.\'94                                                                        \
\
          As Diomedes prayed, Pallas Athena heard.\
[140] She put fresh strength into his legs and upper arms.                                                 \
          Standing close by, she spoke. Her words had wings.          \
\
          \'93Take courage, Diomedes, in this fight with Trojans.\
          I\'92ve put your father\'92s strength into your chest,\
          that shield-bearing horseman\'92s fearless power.\
          And I\'92ve removed the filter from your eyes\
          which covered them before, so now,\
          you\'92ll easily distinguish gods from men.\
          If a god comes here and stands against you,\
          don\'92t offer to fight any deathless one,                                                                                 \
[150] except for Aphrodite, Zeus\'92 daughter.                                                                 \
          If she fights, cut her with your sharp bronze.\'94          \
\
          Bright-eyed Athena left. Diomedes charged off,\
          joining at once those soldiers fighting in the front,\
          his spirit on fire to battle Trojans, seized by frenzy\
          three times greater than before. He was like a lion\
          slightly hurt by a shepherd guarding his sheep flock\
          out in the wilds, when it jumps the wall into the pen.\
          But he\'92s not killed it. The wound rouses the beast\'92s strength.\
          The shepherd can\'92t keep the charging lion from his sheep,\
[160] who, left unguarded, panic. Huddled in a mass,                                                                        \
          they crowd in on one another. So the lion,\
          in his hot rage, leaps over the wide sheep-fold wall.\
          That\'92s how strong Diomedes went to fight the Trojans\
          in his angry fury.          \
\
          First he killed Astynous,\
          and then Hypeiron, a shepherd of his people.\
          His bronze spear hit one right above the nipple.\
          His huge sword struck the other on the collar,\
          by the shoulder, slicing through the shoulder bone,\
          severing it from Hypeiron\'92s neck and back.\
[170] He left them there, to chase Abas and Polyidus,                                                              \
          sons of old Eurydamas, interpreter of dreams.                                                                                   \
          The old man didn\'92t visit them to explain their dreams,\
          for mighty Diomedes slaughtered both of them.\
          Then Diomedes went after Xanthus and Tho\'f6n,\
          two sons of Phaenops, both of whom he loved.\
          Worn down by sad old age, he\'92d have no other child,\
          no person to inherit all his property.\
          Diomedes killed them, took the life they loved,\
          leaving bitter grief and anguish for their father,\
[180] who wouldn\'92t welcome them back home from war alive.                                       \
          His next of kin thus divided up his assets.\
          Diomedes then challenged two sons of Priam,\
          son of Dardanus, both in a single chariot\'97                                                                                          \
          Echemmon and Chromius. Just as a lion\
          leaps onto cattle and snaps necks on the cows,\
          some heifer grazing in the bushes, so Tydeus\'92s son\
          knocked them out of their chariot viciously,\
          against their will. Then he stripped their armour.\
          His companions took the horses to the ships.          \
\
[190] Aeneas saw Diomedes cutting his way                                                     \
          through ranks of soldiers. He charged on through the fight,\
          the clash of spears, looking for Pandarus.\
          He met Lycaon\'92s son, a fine and powerful man.\
          Standing close by, Aeneas said to him:          \
\
          \'93Pandarus,                                                                      \
          where\'92s your bow, your feathered arrows,\
          your reputation as a splendid archer?\
          No man can match your expertise in that.\
          No one in Lycia can claim to be your better.\
          Come, raise your hands in prayer to Zeus,\
[200] then shoot an arrow at that man, whose force                         \
          now dominates the field, hurting Trojans badly,\
          hacking limbs from many fine young men,\
          unless, of course, it is some angry god,\
          displeased with Trojans\'92 sacrificial gifts.\
          It\'92s hard to stand against a raging god.\'94          \
\
          To Aeneas Lycaon\'92s fine son then replied:          \
\
          \'93Aeneas, counsellor to bronze-armed Trojans,                                                        \
          from all I see, I think that man must be\
          the warlike son of Tydeus. I know him\
[210] by his shield, the visor on his helmet,                                                                  \
          and by looking at his horses. I\'92m not sure\
          he\'92s not a god. But if he\'92s the man\
          I think he is, the fierce son of Tydeus,\
          he could not be charging at us in this way\
          without help from some god beside him,\
          an immortal with a covering cloud\
          around his shoulders, the god who pushed aside\
          that sharp arrow which struck Diomedes.\
          For I\'92ve already shot an arrow at him,\
[220] hit his shoulder through that moulded armour.                                       \
          I thought I\'92d shipped him straight to Hades.                                                              \
          But I didn\'92t kill him. The man must be\
          some angry god. But we\'92ve no horses here,\
          no chariot for me to chase him in.\
          In storage in Lycaon\'92s house somewhere\
          there are eleven chariots, new ones, too.\
          They\'92re beautiful and made just recently,\
          but covered up with drapes. Beside each one\
          stand pairs of horses, munching wheat and barley.\
[230] When I was coming here, old soldier Lycaon,                                             \
          in his well-built home, gave me much advice.\
          He told me to take chariots and horses\
          when I lead Trojans into the hot heart of war.                                                           \
          But I didn\'92t follow his advice. If I had,\
          things would have been much better for me.\
          But I worried about the horses\'97they\'92d lack forage\
          with so many men all crammed together,\
          and they were used to eating very well.\
          I left them and came to Troy to fight on foot,\
[240] relying on my expertise in archery.                                                                          \
          But that skill is apparently of little use.\
          For already I\'92ve hit two of their best men,\
          Tydeus\'92 son and the son of Atreus.\
          I\'92ve drawn blood from both of them, it\'92s true,\
          but that just made them much more dangerous.\
          It was a evil time, that day I took                                                                                              \
          my curved bow off its peg to lead my Lycians\
          to lovely Troy, a favour for prince Hector.\
          If I get home and see with my own eyes\
[250] my native land, my wife, my large and lofty home,                                \
          let someone chop my head off on the spot,\
          if I don\'92t smash this bow with my own hands\
          and throw the pieces in the blazing fire.\
          For me it\'92s been completely useless.\'94          \
\
          Aeneas, leader of the Trojans, then replied:          \
\
          \'93Don\'92t talk like that. Things won\'92t change at all\
          until the two of us go out to challenge\
          Diomedes with a chariot and horses,\
          until we confront him with our weapons.                                                                        \
[260] Come, get in my chariot. Then you\'92ll see                                  \
          how good these horses are from Tros\'92 stock,\
          skilled in rapid movement on the plain,\
          in all directions, in pursuit or in retreat.\
          This pair will take us safely to the city,\
          should Zeus give victory to Diomedes.\
          Let\'92s go. Take the whip and glistening reins.\
          I\'92ll leave you the horses, so I can fight.\
          Or if you fight him, I\'92ll control the horses.\'94          \
\
          Lycaon\'92s fine son then said in reply:          \
\
[270] \'93Aeneas, you should take the reins yourself,                                                        \
          guide your own horses\'97for they will pull\
          your curving chariot that much better\
          with a driver they\'92re accustomed to,\
          if we must flee Tydeus\'92 son this time.\
          If they miss your voice, they may shy or panic,\
          or refuse to charge straight into battle.\
          Then the son of great-hearted Tydeus\
          in his attack may kill us both, and lead\
          these swift horses off. You drive the chariot,\
[280] guide your horses. I\'92ll do battle with him\'97                              \
          my spear will give him a sharp welcome.\'94          \
\
          They finished talking, climbed up together, and set off,\
          riding out in a fine chariot, both keen to kill,\
          driving the swift horses against Tydeus\'92 son.                                                                                       \
          Seeing them coming, Sthenelus, Capaneus\'92 brave son,\
          at once spoke up to Diomedes\'97his words had wings.          \
\
          \'93Diomedes, son of Tydeus, my heart\'92s\
          true friend, I see two men approaching,\
          eager to attack you, two powerful men,\
[290] an outstanding team. One\'92s Pandarus,                                                               \
          the skilful archer, who boasts he\'92s Lycaon\'92s son.\
          The other is Aeneas, proud Anchises\'92 son,\
          that\'92s his claim. His mother\'92s Aphrodite.\
          So come, let\'92s retire with the horses,\
          in case our quick charge through front lines\
          ends up costing you your precious life.\'94                                                                                      \
\
          Strong Diomedes, with a scowl, answered Sthenelus:          \
\
          \'93Don\'92t talk of moving back. For I know well\
          you won\'92t persuade me. By birth it\'92s not in me\
[300] to shirk war or seek refuge. My spirit\'92s strong.                                          \
          Nor am I keen to climb up in the chariot.\
          I\'92ll go to fight them as I am, on foot.\
          Pallas Athena does not allow me\
          to withdraw in fear. Their horses may be fast,\
          but they\'92ll not carry them both back again,\
          away from us, even if one escapes.\
          But I will tell you this\'97keep it in mind\'97\
          if Athena, that clever schemer, gives me                                                                          \
          great glory and I do kill them both,\
[310] then you must hold our swift horses here,                                      \
          tying these reins up to the chariot rail.\
          Remember to run down Aeneas\'92 team,\
          then drive those horses from the Trojans\
          to well-armed Achaeans. For those horses\
          come from the stock that wide-seeing Zeus\
          gave Tros, payment for Ganymede, his son.*\
          They\'92re the finest horses under the sun,\
          beneath the light of day. Anchises,\
          king of men, got some of that line by stealth,\
[320] putting his mares into Laomedon\'92s herd                                  \
          without his knowledge. Six of those horses                                                                   \
          became the breeding stock on his estate.\
          He kept four of them in his own stable\
          and gave Aeneas two, horses so fierce,\
          they scatter men before them. If we can,\
          we\'92ll catch these two, win ourselves great glory.\'94          \
\
          As they talked to each other of their strategy,\
          the fast horses quickly brought the two men closer.\
          Lycaon\'92s worthy son spoke first, shouting out:          \
\
[330] \'93Great spirited, warlike son of Tydeus,                                                             \
          that noble man, I see that my sharp arrow,\
          a bitter shaft, did not destroy you.\
          So now I\'92ll try to hit you with my spear.\'94          \
\
          He spoke, balanced his long-shadowed spear, and threw it.                                              \
          The spear hit the son of Tydeus on his shield.\
          The bronze point pierced it, but stopped at the body armour.\
          Seeing that, Lycaon\'92s fine son let out a mighty cheer:          \
\
          \'93You\'92re hit, right in the ribs. You won\'92t last long.\
          I think you\'92ve given me a glorious triumph.\'94          \
\
[340] Unperturbed, powerful Diomedes said to him:                                                                            \
\
          \'93You\'92re wrong. You haven\'92t hit me. In my view,\
          this matter won\'92t end for the two of you,\
          until one of you falls dead, and his blood\
          satisfies in full hard warlike Ares.\'94          \
\
          That said, he threw his spear. Athena guided it                                                                               \
          straight to Pandarus\'92 nose, directly by the eyes.\
          It smashed through his white teeth. The tireless bronze\
          sliced through his tongue at its root, coming out his chin,\
          right at the tip. Pandarus fell from the chariot,\
[350] his brightly shining armour rattling round him.                                                               \
          The swiftly running horses swerved aside.\
          Then and there his life-force, his spirit, left him.\
          Aeneas then leapt down with his long spear and shield,\
          fearing Achaeans would somehow haul away the corpse.\
          He made a stand by Pandarus, like a lion,\
          confident of its strength. He held his spear in front,\
          his round shield, too, with fearful shouts, fiercely eager                                                         \
          to kill anyone who came up to confront him.\
          The son of Tydeus picked up a stone, a massive rock\
[360] which no two men now alive could lift. He threw it                                \
          all by himself with ease. It hit Aeneas\'92 hip,\
          where thigh meets pelvis, what people call the hip joint.\
          The boulder smashed the socket and both tendons round it.\
          The rough edges on the rock scraped off his skin.\
          Falling to his knees, warlike Aeneas stayed down,\
          supporting himself with his strong hand on the ground.\
          Black night came down and covered both his eyes.                                                                      \
          Aeneas, king of men, would have perished there,\
          if Aphrodite, Zeus\'92 daughter, hadn\'92t seen him right away.\
[370] She was his mother\'97she\'92d conceived him with Anchises,                                   \
          while he was tending cattle. Wrapping her white arms\
          around the son she loved, she hid him in the folds\
          of her bright gown, to ward off any spears,\
          should some Danaan driving with swift horses\
          hurl a spear into his chest and take his life.\
          She then began to carry her dear son from the fight.          \
\
          Meanwhile, Sthenelus, son of Capaneus,\
          did not forget what Diomedes, skilled in war cries,                                                                      \
          told him. He pulled his sure-footed horses to one side,\
[380] beyond the fight, tying the reins onto the rail,                                                                   \
          and then went after those fine-maned horses of Aeneas.\
          He drove the animals away from Trojan lines\
          towards well-armed Achaeans. There he gave them\
          to his dear companion De\'efpylus, whom he esteemed\
          above all others the same age as himself,\
          since they both thought alike. He instructed him\
          to take them to the hollow ships. Then brave Sthenelus\
          climbed back into his chariot, grabbed the shining reins,\
          and raced the strong horses back, keen to rejoin Diomedes.          \
\
[390] But Diomedes with his ruthless bronze had gone                                             \
          to run down Aphrodite\'97knowing she was not a god\
          who could do much in battle, not one of those\
          who control men\'92s wars. She was no Athena,\
          no goddess Strife, who destroys whole cities.\
          He chased her through the crowded battle zone.\
          When he met her, great-hearted Tydeus\'92 son\
          charged, lunging with his sharp spear at Aphrodite.\
          His weapon wounded her slim wrist, piercing the skin\
          above her hand, right through her godlike robe,\
[400] a garment the Graces had made for her themselves.*                                                \
          Immortal divine fluid then flowed out, ichor,\
          which circulates only in the blessed gods.                                                                                              \
          They don\'92t eat food or drink down gleaming wine.\
          Hence, they lack blood, and men call them immortal.\
          Aphrodite screamed wildly and let go of her son.\
          But Phoebus Apollo caught him in his hands,\
          then shielded him with a dark cloud, just in case\
          some fast-riding Danaan threw a spear into his chest\
          and took away his life. Then Diomedes,\
          expert in war cries, shouted loudly:          \
\
[410] \'93Daughter of Zeus,                                                            \
          leave war and fights alone. Isn\'92t it enough\
          for you to fool around with feeble women?\
          If you start loitering on the battlefield,                                                                               \
          I think the war will make you shake with terror,\
          even though you learn about it from a distance.\'94          \
\
          Diomedes spoke. Aphrodite left in agony,\
          distressed and fearful. Wind-swift Iris came to her,\
          led her off, out of the crowd, moaning in pain,\
          her fair skin stained and wounded. She came across\
[420] fierce Ares, seated on the left flank of the fight,                                                               \
          his spear and his fast horses resting on a cloud.\
          Falling on her knees, she implored her dear brother,\
          pleading hard for his golden-bridled horses:          \
\
          \'93Dear brother, save me. Give me your horses,\
          so I may go back up to Mount Olympus,\
          the immortals\'92 home. My wound pains me a lot.                                                     \
          A mortal man inflicted this wound on me,\
          Tydeus\'92 son, who\'92d now fight Father Zeus himself.\'94          \
\
          At this, Ares gave her his golden-bridled horses.\
[430] She climbed up in the chariot, her fond heart suffering.                                         \
          Getting in beside her, Iris picked up the reins,\
          then lashed the horses forward. They flew on willingly.\
          At once they reached the gods\'92 home, steep Olympus.\
          There wind-swift Iris stopped the horses, untied them\
          from the chariot, and gave them heavenly fodder.\
          Aphrodite threw herself into her mother\'92s lap,                                                                                  \
          divine Dione, who took her daughter in her arms,\
          caressed her with her hand, then said:          \
\
          \'93My dear child,\
          which of the heavenly gods has done this,\
[440] acted so brazenly against you, as if                                           \
          you\'92d done something evil in broad daylight?\'94          \
\
          Laughter-loving Aphrodite answered her:          \
\
          \'93Proud Diomedes, son of Tydeus,\
          wounded me, for I was carrying off\
          Aeneas, my dear son, away from battle.\
          Of all men, he\'92s the one I love the most.\
          Now grim war is not just Trojans and Achaeans,\
          for Danaans fight against immortals, too.\'94                                                                               \
\
          Dione, queen among the goddesses, replied:          \
\
[450] \'93Be brave, my child, hold on, though you\'92re in pain.                        \
          Many of us living on Olympus\
          have been hurt by men in our attempts\
          to bring harsh troubles on each other.\
          Ares suffered, too, when mighty Otus\
          and Ephialtes, children of Alo\'ebus,\
          tied him up in powerful manacles,\
          then kept him prisoner in a brass jar\
          for thirteen months. Ares would\'92ve died there,\
          with all his war-lust, if their step-mother,\
[460] fair E\'ebriboea, had not told Hermes.                                                                        \
          He stole Ares secretly. Ares was exhausted.                                                                  \
          That harsh imprisonment was breaking him.\
          Hera suffered, as well, when Hercules,\
          the powerful son of Amphitryon,\
          hit her right breast with a three-barbed arrow.\
          She was wracked by pain beyond all cure.\
          With them huge Hades also suffered\
          from a sharp arrow, when this same man,\
          this Hercules, a son of aegis-bearing Zeus,\
[470] shot him in Pylos, among the corpses there,                                                \
          inflicting pain. Hades went straight to Zeus\
          at home on Olympus\'97his heart enraged,\
          in agony, the arrow buried deep\
          in his strong shoulder. He was incensed.                                                                         \
          Pae\'ebon healed him with pain-killing herbs\
          smeared on the wound, for Hades was immortal.\
          What a wretch he was, that Hercules,\
           a trouble maker. He didn\'92t hesitate\
          to commit bad acts with that bow of his\
[480] against the gods who dwell on Mount Olympus.                                    \
          But Athena, the bright-eyed goddess,\
          prompted Tydeus\'92 son to go at you.\
           Still, he\'92s a fool for not remembering\
          the man who fights wars against immortals\
          does not live long. His children have no chance\
          to prattle to their father at his knee,\
          once he comes home from war\'92s grim butchery.\
          Diomedes is surely powerful\'97                                                                                                    \
          but he should take care. A greater power than you\
[490] may come against him. Then Aegialeia,                                                             \
          wise daughter of Adrestus, brave wife\
          of horse-taming Diomedes, with cries of sorrow\
          will rouse all her dear household from their sleep,\
          lamenting the husband whom she married,\
          the best of the Achaeans.\'94          \
\
          As she said this,\
          with her hand Dione cleaned away the ichor\
          on Aphrodite\'92s wrist, healing the hand,\
          curing Aphrodite of her pain. Looking on,\
          Athena and Hera teased Zeus, son of Cronos:                                                                                               \
\
[500] \'93Father Zeus, you won\'92t get angry with me                             \
          for what I say, will you? Aphrodite,\
          trying to coax some new Achaean woman\
          into running off with one of those Trojans\
          she loves so much, must have been caressing\
          some well-dressed Achaean lady and scratched\
          her delicate hand on a golden brooch.\'94                \
\
          When they spoke, the father of gods and men smiled,\
          called for golden Aphrodite, and then said to her:          \
\
          \'93My child, this warfare is not your business.\
[510] You should concern yourself with your own work\'97                \
          love, especially erotic love in marriage.\
          Swift Ares and Athena will take care of this.\'94                                                                        \
\
          As the gods talked the matter over with each other,\
          Diomedes, expert at war cries, sought out Aeneas.\
          Though he knew Apollo himself was shielding him,\
          he had no fear at all of that great god, pushing on\
          to kill Aeneas, then strip his fine armour from him.\
          Three times he charged forward, in a frenzy for the kill.\
          Three times Apollo pushed back his shining shield.\
[520] But when for the fourth time he came on like a god,                                                  \
          Apollo, the far shooter, in a terrifying voice, cried out:          \
\
          \'93Take care, son of Tydeus. Go back.                                                                                    \
          Don\'92t think you\'92re equal to the gods.\
          The race of men who walk upon the ground\
          can never match the race of deathless gods.\'94          \
\
          At these words, the son of Tydeus drew back somewhat,\
          avoiding the anger of Apollo, the far shooter.\
          Apollo put Aeneas some distance from the fight,\
          on sacred Pergamus, where his temple stood.\
[530] There, in the large shrine, Leto and Artemis,                                                                       \
          the archer goddess, healed Aeneas, restoring him\
          to his former power and magnificence.\
          Apollo of the silver bow then made an image,                                                                                    \
          a copy of Aeneas, with matching armour,\
          around which Trojans and brave Achaeans fought,\
          hacking away at ox-hide covering their chests,\
          at the round shields or smaller shields with fringes.\
          Phoebus Apollo then called to foolhardy Ares:          \
\
          \'93Ares, Ares, you bloodstained man-killer,\
[540] can\'92t you return to Diomedes                                                    \
          and remove him from the battle? Right now,\
          he\'92d stand and fight with Father Zeus himself.\
          First, he wounded Aphrodite on the wrist,\
          fighting at close quarters. Then he flung himself,\
          like some god, at me.\'94          \
\
          After saying this,\
          Apollo took a seat high up on Pergamus.                                                                                                 \
          Murderous Ares went in among the Trojan ranks,\
          inspiring the troops.  In the shape of Acamas,\
          Thracian leader, he yelled at Priam\'92s royal sons:          \
\
[550] \'93You sons of Priam, that god-nurtured king,                                             \
          why are you still allowing the Achaeans\
          to keep slaughtering your troops? Are you waiting\
          until they fight by the well-built city gates?\
          There lies great-hearted Anchises\'92 son,\
          Aeneas, whom we honour as we do prince Hector.\
          Come, let\'92s save our brave comrade from the battle roar.\'94          \
\
          Ares\'92 words gave each man courage and blood-zest for war.                                              \
          Then Sarpedon spoke to Hector, bitterly complaining:          \
\
          \'93Hector, where\'92s that courage you used to have?\
[560] You kept claiming you could guard the city                             \
          on your own, without your people or your allies,\
          using your own family and relatives.\
          Looking round now, I can\'92t see them here,\
          any of them. They\'92ve all taken refuge,\
          like dogs around a lion. Those of us\
          who\'92ve come as allies, we do all the fighting.\
          I marched here as an ally, travelling far,\
          for Lycia is a long, long way from here,\
          by the swirling river Xanthus, where I left\
[570] my dear wife, my infant son, much property,                                                        \
          something poor men covet. But for all that,\
          I urge my Lycian troops to action,\
          I stand and fight all comers on my own,\
          when I\'92ve nothing for the enemy to take.\
          But you stand around, without urging men\
          to fight back or defend their wives. Watch out.\
          You may become a prize yourself\'97a trophy\
          for your enemies. You\'92ll be like a fish\
          snared in the meshes of a fatal net.\
[580] They\'92ll quickly smash your well-built city.                                                      \
          You should be thinking of this day and night,                                                           \
          imploring leaders of your famous allies\
          to hold on staunchly, thus preventing them\
          from mounting any serious complaints.\'94          \
\
          Sarpedon\'92s speech stung Hector\'92s heart. Fully armed,\
          he quickly jumped down from his chariot to the ground.\
          Waving two sharp spears, he roamed through all the army,\
          rousing men to fight, steeling hearts for dreadful war.\
          Troops rallied once more and turned to face Achaeans.\
[590] Argives, too, stood firm. The men did not withdraw.                                                 \
          As on the sacred threshing floor wind blows the chaff,\
          while men stand winnowing the crop, when Demeter,                                                             \
          with her golden hair, separates the grain from chaff\
          in the rushing breeze, and piles of chaff grow whiter,\
          so then Achaean troops grew white, covered with dust\
          stirred up by horses\'92 hooves. It coloured the sky bronze.\
          So the chariots came on to battle once again,\
          wheeled round by drivers\'92 strong ferocious hands.\
          Headstrong Ares assisted Trojans in the battle,\
[600] concealing them in darkness, roaming everywhere,                                                      \
          carrying out his orders from Phoebus Apollo,\
          god with the golden sword, who\'92d told him to arouse\
          the Trojans\'92 spirits when he saw Pallas Athena                                                                                 \
          leave the fighting, for she was helping the Danaans.          \
\
          Apollo then sent Aeneas from his costly shrine,\
          putting fighting strength into this warrior\'92s heart,\
          his people\'92s shepherd. Aeneas rejoined his friends,\
          who were overjoyed to see him safe and sound\'97alive\'97\
          approaching with brave spirits. They didn\'92t question him.\
[610] They had too much other work at hand to do.                                                                   \
          For Apollo, god with the silver bow, and Ares,\
          the man killer, along with insatiable Strife,\
          had stirred things up there on the battlefield.          \
\
          Then the two Ajaxes, Odysseus, and Diomedes\
          roused Danaans, urging them to battle.                                                                                                    \
          They did not fear the Trojans\'92 powerful attack\
          and stood their ground like clouds set in place by Zeus,\
          son of Cronos, above a range of mountain peaks\
          on a windless day, quite motionless, while the force\
[620] of North Wind and other raging blasts is sound asleep.                                          \
          When these storm winds blow, they scatter shadowy clouds.\
          That\'92s the way Danaans held their positions then,\
           without flinching, without fear. The son of Atreus\
          moved through the troops and gave out many orders.          \
\
          \'93My friends, be men. Let courage fill your hearts.\
          In the heat of battle remember honour,                                                                            \
          each man\'92s reputation. When men recall\
          their honour, more troops are saved than slaughtered.\
          Those who run away lose life and fame.\'94          \
\
[630] Agamemnon spoke, then quickly hurled his spear.                                                       \
          He hit a good fighting man, comrade to Aeneas,\
          great-hearted De\'efco\'f6n, son of Pergasus,\
          whom Trojans honoured as they did king Priam\'92s sons,\
          for he was quick to take his place among the best,\
          the men who do their fighting at the very front.\
          Mighty Agamemnon\'92s spear struck against his shield,\
          but the shield could not hold out\'97the bronze went through,\
          piercing De\'efco\'f6n\'92s belt and sinking in his gut.\
          He fell with a thud, his armour rattling round him.                                                                               \
\
[640] Then Aeneas killed two of the best Danaans,                                                                      \
          Crethon and Orsilochus, whose father lived\
          in well-built Phere, a man of property,\
          descended from the river Alpheus, whose broad streams\
          flow through Pylian land. The river bore Orsilochus,\
          king of many men, and Orsilochus fathered\
          great-hearted Diocles, to whom were born twin sons,\
          Crethon and Orsilochus, experts in all aspects of war.\
          These two, once grown, came with Argives in black ships                                                    \
          to Troy, city rich in horses, to win honour\
[650] for Agamemnon and Menelaus, sons of Atreus.                                                                \
          Death\'92s final moment took them in. As two lions,\
          cared for by their mother in a deep thick forest\
          on a mountain peak, steal stout sheep and cattle\
          and plunder people\'92s farmsteads, until they perish,\
          killed by sharp bronze in the hands of men, so these two died,\
          cut down by Aeneas. They fell like lofty pines.                                                                                            \
\
          War-loving Menelaus felt pity for these two,\
          seeing them die. He made his way through the men\'92s front ranks,\
          armed in glittering bronze, brandishing his spear.\
[660] Ares stirred his battle spirit, planning his death                                      \
          at Aeneas\'92 hand. But then Antilochus,\
          son of great-hearted Nestor, saw Menelaus.\
          He hurried through the foremost ranks, in his concern\
          for this shepherd of the people, that if he came to grief,\
          all their efforts would be completely futile.\
          Menelaus and Aeneas, now faced each other,\
          with eager hands and spears, ready to begin the fight.\
          But when Antilochus stood by Menelaus,                                                                                               \
          Aeneas, though a swift fighter, started to withdraw,\
[670] seeing these two men standing their ground together.                                            \
          So Menelaus and Antilochus dragged the corpses\
          of Crethon and Orsilochus to Achaean troops,\
          placed the two dead heroes in the hands of friends,\
          then turned back to fight with those in the front ranks.          \
\
          Antilochus and Menelaus then killed Pylaemenes,\
          a man like Ares, leader of the Paphlagonians,\
          great-hearted, shield-bearing men. The son of Atreus,\
          famous spearman Menelaus, struck him,\
          as he stood up in his chariot, hitting him\
[680] right on his collar bone. Antilochus hit Mydon,                                                                        \
          Atymnius\'92 noble son, the attendant driver,\
          as he was wheeling his sure-footed horses round.\
          He struck him with a rock square on the elbow.\
          The reins, decorated with rich ivory,\
          fell from his hands down onto the dusty ground.\
          Antilochus sprang out and with his sword struck Mydon\
          on the temple. Gasping with pain, Mydon pitched over,\
          and tumbled from the well-made chariot headfirst,\
          his head and shoulders disappearing in the dirt.\
[690] For some time he stayed stuck, buried in deep sand,                                                 \
          until his horses kicked him flat, level with the dust,\
          stamping him into the ground, as Antilochus\
          whipped them on, leading them back to Achaean troops.          \
\
          Hector saw this from the lines. He ran against them,                                                                 \
          shouting wildly, with strong Trojan soldiers in support.\
          Leading these men came Ares along with fearful Strife,\
          bringing war\'92s pitiless and murderous confusion.\
          Ares worked with a huge spear in his hands, moving round,\
          sometimes behind Hector, sometimes in front of him.          \
\
[700] When Diomedes, skilled in war cries, noticed Ares,                                                     \
          he shuddered\'97just a man crossing a large plain\
          stops at a raging river rushing to the sea,\
          looks helplessly at swirling foam, and moves away\'97\
          so Tydeus\'92 son backed off then, saying to his men:                                                                                \
\
          \'93My friends, we\'92re so amazed prince Hector\
          is such a spearman, so courageous, warlike.\
          But he\'92s always got some god beside him,\
          to ward off destruction. Right now, it\'92s Ares\
          he\'92s has with him, looking like a mortal man.\
[710] Stay turned towards the Trojans, but fall back.                                        \
          Don\'92t try to fight it out with gods.\'94          \
\
          Diomedes spoke. Trojans then approached much closer.\
          Hector killed two men, keen warriors\'97Menesthes\
          and Anchialus\'97both riding in a single chariot.                                                                                \
          Seeing them fall, great Telamonian Ajax felt pity.\
          He approached, stood firm, then threw his shining spear.\
          The spear struck Amphion, son of Selagus,\
          who owned much property in Paesus, with many crops.\
          Fate led him to become allied with Priam and his sons.\
[720] Ajax, son of Telamon, hit Amphion in the belt.                                                                 \
          The long-shadowed spear struck hard, low in his gut.\
          He collapsed with a crash. Noble Ajax ran up\
          to strip the armour off, but Trojans showered him\
          with bright, sharp spears. His shield took many hits.                                                                 \
          Pushing his heel into the corpse he pulled out his bronze spear,\
          but the hail of weapons stopped him stripping off        \
          Amphion\'92s fine armour from his shoulders.\
          He feared the fierce brave Trojans standing by the corpse,\
          for many spearmen crowded him and forced him back.\
[730] And Ajax, for all his massive size and strength,                                                                 \
          for all his courage, had to withdraw, shaken.          \
\
          As these men toiled in frantic battle, powerful fate\
          drove strong, brave Tlepolemus, son of Hercules,\
          against godlike Sarpedon. These two men approached,                                                          \
          facing each other at close quarters, son and grandson\
          of cloud-gathering Zeus. Tlepolemus called out first:          \
\
          \'93Sarpedon, counsellor to the Lycians,\
          what forces you to cower down right here,\
          quite ignorant in battle? Those who say\
[740] you\'92re aegis-bearing Zeus\'92 son are liars.                                                             \
          You\'92re far inferior to those men born of Zeus\
          in times long past. Consider mighty Hercules,\
          my father. He was quite different, they say\'97\
          steadfast, brave, his spirit like a lion.\
          He came here once for Laomedon\'92s horses.                                                                   \
          With fewer men and only six ships, he sacked\
          the Trojan city and emptied all its streets.*\
          But you\'92ve a paltry spirit, your troops\
          are withering away. And it\'92s impossible\
[750] you\'92ll help the Trojans by coming here                                     \
          from Lycia, even if you\'92re powerful.\
          I\'92ll kill you, and you\'92ll pass through Hades\'92 gate.\'94          \
\
          Sarpedon, Lycian leader, then said in reply:          \
\
          \'93Yes, Tlepolemus, Hercules did destroy\
          sacred Ilion, but through the foolishness\
          of the city\'92s king, high-born Laomedon,\
          who tricked the man who\'92d worked so well for him.                                           \
          He didn\'92t offer Hercules the horses\
          he\'92d come so far to get. As for you,\
[760] I\'92ll now see to your death, that fatal blackness.                                         \
          You\'92ll give me great glory, and your life\
          you\'92ll give to famous horseman Hades.\'94          \
\
          Sarpedon spoke. Tlepolemus raised his ash spear high.\
          Then two long spears flew from their hands together.\
          Sarpedon\'92s spear hit Tlepolemus right in the neck.\
          The cruel point kept going. Dark night covered up his eyes.\
          Tlepolemus\'92 long spear struck Sarpedon in his left thigh.                                                     \
          Its bloodthirsty point pierced him, aiming for the bone.\
          On this occasion, Father Zeus held off his fate.\
[770] His brave companions carried off godlike Sarpedon,                                                   \
          pulled down by the long spear\'92s weight, as it dragged behind.\
          No one thought to pull the ash spear from his leg,\
          so he could walk. They were in such a rush to shift him.          \
\
          On the opposing side, well-armed Achaeans\
          carried Tlepolemus away from battle.\
          Godlike Odysseus noticed them, his spirit steady,\
          but his fond heart was burning, as he turned over                                                                        \
          in his mind, whether to chase after that son of Zeus,\
          loud thunderer, or stay to kill more Lycians.\
[780] But Fate did not decree that brave Odysseus                                           \
          should kill Zeus\'92 mighty son with his sharp bronze.\
          Athena turned his heart against that Lycian crowd.\
          So he killed Coeranus, Alastor, Chromius,\
          Alcandrus, Halius, No\'ebmon, and Prytanis.\
          Lord Odysseus would have killed still more Lycians,\
          if Hector of the flashing helmet had not seen him,                                                                       \
          then gone through the ranks in front, armed in shining bronze,\
          terrifying Danaans. Sarpedon, son of Zeus,\
          was glad to see him coming. He implored Hector:          \
\
[790] \'93Son of Priam, don\'92t let me lie here,                                                                    \
          a trophy for Danaans. Rescue me.\
          Let me remain forever in your city,\
          since it seems I\'92ll not be going home\
          to cheer up my dear wife and infant son.\'94          \
\
          Hector of the flashing helmet made no reply.\
          He charged on, eager to force the Argives quickly back,                                                         \
          to massacre large numbers of their soldiers.\
          God-like Sarpedon\'92s noble comrades placed him\
          by a fine oak tree, sacred to aegis-bearing Zeus.\
[800] Pelagon, his strong, well-loved attendant, then pushed                          \
          the ash spear straight out through his thigh. Sarpedon fainted.\
          A mist fell, clouding his eyes, but soon he breathed again.\
          North Wind\'92s breeze revived him, blowing air into his heart,\
          as his spirit panted, gasping his life away.          \
\
          Argives weren\'92t driven back to their black ships by Ares\
          or by bronze-armed Hector. Nor did they wheel about                                                            \
          to battle Trojans face to face. They kept moving back,\
          once they realized Ares was with the Trojans.          \
\
          Among the Argives, who were the first and last men killed\
[810] by Hector, son of Priam, and brazen Ares?                                                                             \
          They were godlike Teuthras, Orestes the charioteer,\
          Trechus, an Aetolian spearman, Oenomaus,\
          Helenus, son of Oenops, and Oresbius,\
          with his glittering belt, a man who lived in Hyle\
          and kept himself preoccupied with wealth\
          along the shores of lake Cephisia. Beside him\
          lived even more Boeotians, owners of rich lands.                                                                                       \
\
          White-armed goddess Hera saw Argives being slaughtered\
          in the thick of battle. She spoke out to Athena.          \
\
[820] \'93Alas, Athena, child of aegis-bearing Zeus,                                                 \
          tireless one, we\'92ve made an empty promise\
          to Menelaus, that he\'92d wipe out Troy,\
          that well-built city, before going home,\
          if we let murderous Ares rage on like this.\
          Come, let\'92s both recall our fighting power.\'94          \
\
          Athena, the bright-eyed goddess, agreed with Hera\'92s words.                                            \
          So that revered goddess Hera, daughter of great Cronos,\
          went to prepare her horses with their golden bridles.\
          Then Hebe quickly checked the chariot\'92s curved wheels,\
[830] bronze with eight spokes each, on axles made of iron,                                              \
          wheel rims made out of imperishable gold,\
          edged with tires of close-fitted bronze, an amazing sight.\
          Silver axle boxes revolve on either side.\
          The body of the chariot has gold and silver strips.\
          Two rails run round it. The pole is made of silver.\
          On its end Hebe tied the cross-piece, lovely gold,                                                                         \
          then fixed the golden collar straps. Hera, keen for war,\
          led her swift-footed horses out into their yoke.\
          Then Athena, daughter of aegis-bearing Zeus,\
[840] threw on her father\'92s porch the embroidered gown                                \
          which she had made herself with her own hands.\
          She then put on the robe of cloud-gatherer Zeus\
          and armed herself with weapons for that wretched war.\
          She slung across her shoulders the fearsome tasselled aegis,\
          its borders woven with Fear, Strife, Force, terrorizing Panic,                                             \
          with the chilling, horrifying and monstrous Gorgon\'92s head\'97\
          the horrifying emblem of aegis-bearing Zeus.\
          On her head she placed a double-ridged gold helmet,\
          men from a hundred cities etched upon its four-part crest.\
[850] She set foot in her blazing chariot, grasping                                            \
          her huge, strong, heavy spear, with which she kills men,\
          heroes who annoy her, goddess with a mighty father.         \
          Hera quickly lashed the horses with her whip.\
          The gates of heaven scraped open on their own.\
          The Seasons supervise them, for they\'92re in charge\
          of great heavenly Olympus, opening up                                                                                                    \
          the dense packed clouds or closing them again.\
          Through these gates the goddesses led out their horses,\
          Hera lashing them ahead. They met the son of Cronos,\
[860] sitting some distance from the other gods,                                                                            \
          on the highest crest of many-ridged Olympus.\
          Hera, white-armed goddess, reined in the horses,\
          then spoke to Zeus, most high son of Cronos:          \
\
          \'93Father Zeus, aren\'92t you angry with Ares\
          for killing off those warriors? He\'92s wiped out\
          so many Achaean men, good ones, too,\
          and so rashly. It\'92s not right. It pains me.\
          Meanwhile, Aphrodite and Apollo,                                                                                         \
          with his silver bow, are enjoying themselves,\
[870] happy about this madman they\'92ve unleashed,                                           \
          who has no sense of what\'92s appropriate.\
          Father Zeus, would I annoy you very much\
          if I hurt Ares and chased him from this fight?\'94          \
\
          Cloud gatherer Zeus smiled and then said in reply:          \
\
          \'93All right, then, do that. But set Athena,\
          goddess of the battle spoils, against him.\
          For she\'92s the one who\'92s most accustomed\
          to inflicting nasty pains on Ares.\'94          \
\
          White-armed goddess Hera agreed with what Zeus said.\
[880] She whipped the horses on. They flew off willingly,                                                     \
          mid-way between the starry heaven and earth.\
          As far as a man on a height can see in the distant haze                                                           \
          as he looks out across the wine-dark sea, that\'92s how far\
          gods\'92 snorting horses vault in just one stride.\
          When they came to Troy\'92s two flowing rivers,\
          where the Simoeis and the Scamander meet,\
          white-armed goddess Hera stopped the horses,\
          loosed them from the chariot and hid them in thick cloud.\
          Simoeis produced ambrosia for them to eat.\
[890] The goddesses moved stealthily, like wild pigeons,                                                      \
          eager to assist the Argive troops. They reached that place\
          where most of the bravest men were fighting, in a crowd                                                     \
          by mighty Diomedes, tamer of horses,\
          like lions who eat raw meat or wild boars whose strength\
          is not easily exhausted. In that place Hera,\
          white-armed goddess, stood up, looking just like Stentor,\
          a great-hearted, loud-throated man, whose voice could shout\
          with the strength of fifty men. Hera cried out:          \
\
          \'93Shame on you, you Argive warriors.\
[900] You\'92re a disgrace, good only for display.                                                           \
          When lord Achilles used to go to battle,\
          the Trojans didn\'92t dare to venture out\
          beyond the Dardanian gates. They feared\
          his mighty spear. But now they\'92re fighting                                                                     \
          well outside the city, by our hollow ships.\'94          \
\
          With these words, she roused each man\'92s heart and spirit.\
          Bright-eyed Athena quickly moved to Diomedes.\
          She found that king beside his chariot and horses,\
          recovering from the wound from Pandarus\'92 arrow.\
[910] The sweat under the wide strap of his round shield                                \
          was bothering him. The chafing made his arms grow tired.\
          He was lifting up the strap, wiping off dark blood.\
          Setting her hand on the chariot yoke, the goddess said:          \
\
          \'93Tydeus had a son not much like his father.                                                              \
          He may have been short, but he was a fighter.\
          When I would not allow him into battle\
          or to display himself, that time he came\
          to Thebes alone, far from his Achaeans,\
          in the middle of all those Cadmeans,\
[920] I told him to be quiet at the palace feast.                                                        \
          But he possessed a powerful spirit\
          always active in him. So he challenged\
          Cadmean young men and beat them easily.\
          That\'92s how much I helped him. Now I stand here,\
          beside you, taking care of you, your friend.\
          And I\'92m telling you to fight the Trojans.                                                                           \
          But you\'92re either weary after so much action,\
          your limbs worn out, or fear has made you timid.\
          If so, then you\'92re no son of Tydeus,\
[930] the son of warlike Oeneus.\'94                                                                                                       \
\
          In answer to Athena, mighty Diomedes said:          \
\
          \'93I recognize you, goddess daughter\
          of aegis-bearing Zeus. I\'92ll speak to you\
          quite openly, concealing nothing. It\'92s not\
          that fear has made me hesitant or anxious.\
          But I\'92m remembering your own instructions,\
          what you laid down. You told me not to fight\
          face to face with any immortal god,\
          unless Zeus\'92 daughter Aphrodite                                                                                              \
[940] should come to battle. With my sharp bronze,                                         \
          I was to wound her. I\'92ve pulled myself back,\
          and told the other Argives to stay here\
          since I see Ares dominates the fight.\'94          \
\
          Bright-eyed goddess Athena answered him:          \
\
          \'93Diomedes, son of Tydeus,\
          you fill my heart with joy. Don\'92t fear Ares\
          or any other immortal deity.\
          For I\'92ll give you all the help you need.\
          But come, first let your sure-footed horses\
[950] charge at Ares. Hit him up close. Have no fear                         \
          of headstrong Ares, that madman, born evil,                                                               \
          that fickle god. Just now he gave his word\
          to me and Hera too that he would fight\
          the Trojans and assist the Argives. But now,\
          he\'92s forgotten that and helps the Trojans.\'94          \
\
          Saying this, Athena grabbed Sthenelus\'92 hand\
          and hauled him from the chariot to the ground.\
          He jumped up at once. The goddess climbed up eagerly\
          beside lord Diomedes in the chariot.\
[960] The oaken axle groaned aloud, weighed down,                                                                 \
          bearing the fearful goddess and the finest man.\
          Pallas Athena took up the reins and whip.                                                                                             \
          First, she led the sure-footed horses against Ares.\
          He was removing armour from huge Periphas,\
          Ochesius\'92 fine son, by far the best of the Aetolians.\
          Blood-stained Ares was stripping him of all his weapons.\
          Then Athena put Hades\'92 helmet on her head,\
          so she was invisible to mighty Ares.\
          But man-killing Ares did see Diomedes.\
[970] He let the body of huge Periphas lie there,                                                                            \
          where he\'92d first killed him and ripped out his spirit.\
          He strode straight up to horse-taming Diomedes.\
          When the two came to close quarters and faced each other,                                             \
          Ares thrust his bronze spear first, over the yoke\
          and horses\'92 reins, eager to take Diomedes\'92 life.\
          Athena, bright-eyed goddess, hands gripping the reins,\
          shoved the spear aside, so its thrust was harmless,\
          above the chariot. Diomedes, skilled in war cries,\
          then made the second thrust with his bronze spear.\
[980] Pallas Athena guided the weapon right to Ares\'92 gut,                                                  \
          the lower part where his waist band went around him.\
          Diomedes wounded Ares, piercing his fair skin,\
          then pulled back on his spear. Brazen Ares roared\
          as loud as the screams of nine or ten thousand men                                                                  \
          when they clash in war. Fear seized Achaeans\'97Trojans, too.\
          They shuddered. That\'92s how strong that cry sounded\
          as it came from Ares, insatiable for war.\
          Just as a dark mist moves upward from the clouds,\
          when in hot weather a strong wind arises,\
[990] so brazen Ares looked to Tydeus\'92 son, Diomedes,                                                          \
          as the god at once soared up into the clouds,\
          ascending to wide heaven. Ares, in a rush,\
          went to the gods\'92 home, steep Olympus, sat by Zeus,\
          distressed at heart. He showed Zeus where he\'92d been wounded,                                 \
          dripping with immortal blood, then made his complaint.\
          His words had wings.          \
\
          \'93Father Zeus,\
          aren\'92t you incensed at this barbarity?\
          We gods are always suffering dreadfully\
          at each other\'92s hands, when we bring men help.\
[1000] We all lay the blame for this on you.                                                                     \
          For you gave birth to that insane young girl,\
          your destructive daughter, always busy\
          with some nastiness. All the other gods,\
          all those on Mount Olympus, do what you say.\
          And each of us is subject to your will.\
          But you never punish her in word or deed.\
          You do nothing, because you gave birth to her\
          yourself, to Athena, your vicious daughter.*                                                                \
          Just now she urged proud Diomedes,\
[1010] son of Tydeus, to charge insanely                                              \
          against deathless gods. First he attacked\
          Aphrodite and struck her on the wrist.\
          Then he charged me, even me, like a god.\
          But my quick feet took me away. If not,\
          I\'92d be in lasting pain with the fearful dead,\
          or have barely lived, wounded by bronze spears.\'94          \
\
          Scowling at him, cloud-gatherer Zeus replied:          \
\
          \'93You hypocrite, don\'92t sit there whining at me.\
          Among the gods who live on Mount Olympus,                                                         \
[1020] you\'92re the one I hate the most. For you love war,                                    \
          constant strife and battle. Your mother, Hera,\
          has an implacable, unyielding spirit.\
          It\'92s hard for me to control how she reacts\
          to what I say. You\'92re suffering because of her,\
          through her conniving, that\'92s what I think.\
          But I\'92ll leave you in pain no longer.\
          You\'92re my child\'97your mother and I made you.\
          But if you\'92d been born from any other god,\
          by now you\'92d be lower than the sons\
[1030] of Ouranos\'97you\'92re so destructive.\'94                                                                                \
\
          Zeus spoke. He instructed Pae\'ebon to heal Ares.\
          Pae\'ebon cured him by spreading pain-killing herbs,                                                                      \
          for Ares wasn\'92t born to die. Just as fig juice\
          added quickly to white milk clots it at once,\
          as it\'92s stirred, that\'92s how fast headstrong Ares healed.\
          Hebe washed him and clothed him in fine garments.\
          He sat beside Zeus, son of Cronos, enjoying his splendour.          \
\
          Athena of Alalcomenae and Argive Hera\
          returned once more to mighty Zeus\'92 house,\
          now they\'92d stopped man-killing Ares\'92 }