{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf460
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural\qc

\f0\fs24 \cf0 Book Seven\
Hector and Ajax\

\i \
[Hector and Paris leave Troy, rejoin the fighting; Athena and Apollo plan to halt the battle; Helenus suggests Hector issue a challenge for single combat; Hector issues his challenge; no one responds; Nestor shames the Achaeans; Achaeans draw lots to see who will fight Hector; Ajax's lot falls out; Ajax's shield is described; Ajax and Hector fight; heralds intervene to stop them; Nestor suggests collecting the dead and building a defensive wall and ditch; in Troy Antenor suggests the return of Helen; Paris refuses but offers to return all the goods he took away; Idaios goes to the Argives to suggest a truce to bury the dead, repeats Paris' offer; the Achaeans refuse the offer; the armies collect and cremate the dead; the Achaeans build the wall; Poseidon objects to Zeus; both sides feast after the funeral rites]\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\i0 \cf0            \
          After glorious Hector had talked with Paris,\
          he and his brother hurried through the gates,\
          both of them with hearts on fire to fight in battle.\
          Just as some god sends a breeze to sailors in distress,\
          when they work themselves too hard rowing out at sea,\
          bodies broken with fatigue at their polished oars\'97\
          that\'92s how these two looked to the long-suffering Trojans.          \
\
          Paris then killed Menesthius, king Areithous\'92 son.\
          He lived in Arne, born from Areithous,\
  [10] a mace fighter, and ox-eyed Phylomedusa.                                                           \
          Hector hit Eioneus with his sharp spear\
          in the neck, just under his bronze helmet rim.\
          His legs collapsed. Glaucus, son of Hippolochus,\
          leader of Lycians, amid the battle din,\
          struck Iphinous, son of Dexius, in the shoulder,\
          just as he was jumping in behind fast horses.\
          He fell out of his chariot down on the ground.\
          Then his limbs went limp and lifeless.          \
\
          When goddess Athena with her glittering eyes\
  [20] saw Argives being slaughtered in the battle frenzy,                               \
          she rushed down from Olympus heights to sacred Ilion.                                   \
          Apollo, keeping watch from Pergamus,\
          came to confront her.* He wanted victory\
          for Trojans. The two met one another by the oak tree.\
          Lord Apollo, son of Zeus, addressed Athena first:          \
\
          \'93Daughter of great-hearted Zeus, why has your spirit\
          pushed you so eagerly down from Olympus?\
          You want to change the tide of battle,\
          giving victory to the Danaans.\
  [30] You don\'92t pity Trojans as they\'92re butchered.                                  \
          But it would be much better if you\'92d follow\
          what I say\'97let\'92s put an end to battle\
          and the killing, for today. They\'92ll fight again,\
          later on, until they reach their goal in Troy,                                               \
          since the demolition of that city\
          is what you goddesses desire in your hearts.\'94          \
\
          Bright-eyed Athena then said to Apollo:          \
\
          \'93God who works from far away, I agree\'97\
          that\'92s what I myself intended, coming\
  [40] from Olympus down to mingle here                                                           \
          with Trojans and Achaeans. How will you get\
          these troops to end this present battle?\'94          \
\
          Lord Apollo, son of Zeus, answered Athena:          \
\
          \'93Let\'92s rouse the powerful fighting spirit\
          of horse-taming Hector, so he challenges\
          one of the Danaans to fight him alone,\
          in a grim single combat, one on one.                                                             \
          Bronze-armed Achaeans, in admiration,\
          may incite someone to fight lord Hector.\'94          \
\
  [50] Apollo spoke, and bright-eyed Athena then agreed.                              \
          Helenus, Priam\'92s much-loved son, in his heart\
          well understood the scheme the gods had planned.\
          So he went to Hector, stood by him, and said:          \
\
          \'93Hector, son of Priam, wise as Zeus,\
          why not be persuaded by what I suggest,\
          since I\'92m your brother? Let other Trojans\
          and Achaeans sit. You should challenge\
          the best of the Achaeans to fight you,                                                         \
          a personal single combat, a grim fight.\
  [60] I\'92ve heard the voices of eternal gods\'97                                            \
          now is not your fated time to die.\'94          \
\
          Helenus spoke. Hector was elated with the plan.\
          He went into the middle of the Trojan ranks\
          gripping the centre of his spear and pushed men back.\
          The men sat down. Agamemnon, on his side,\
          got well-armed Achaeans to stop fighting, too.\
          Athena, with Apollo of the silver bow,\
          perched in the lofty oak tree sacred to Zeus,\
          who bears the aegis, looking like two vultures,                                                  \
  [70] set to enjoy the unfolding human action.                                                 \
          Ranks of men were closely packed, bristling with shields,\
          with spears and helmets. As West Wind, when it starts to blow,\
          ruffles the sea, and waters under it grow black\'97\
          that\'92s what ranks of Trojans and Achaeans looked like\
          out there on the plain. Hector then addressed both armies:          \
\
          \'93Listen to me, you Trojans, you well-armed Achaeans,\
          so I may speak what my heart prompts.\
          High-ruling son of Cronos has quashed our pact,\
          intending to bring both of us bad things,\
 [80] until you capture well-built Troy or else                                                    \
          are conquered beside your seaworthy ships.\
          Achaea\'92s finest men are here among you.\
          Let the one whose heart now drives him\
          to fight with me step out as champion,\
          your representative against lord Hector.\
          That\'92s what I propose\'97let Zeus be my witness.\
          If your man kills me with his sharpened bronze,\
          let him strip my armour, take it away,\
          off to your hollow ships, but give my body\
  [90] back to my house, so Trojans and their wives                                \
          may give me ritual burning once I\'92m dead.                                                 \
          If I kill your champion, if Apollo\
          grants me that triumph, I\'92ll strip his armour,\
          take it to sacred Ilion and hang it\
          in the temple of Apollo, the far shooter.\
          I\'92ll give up the body to be taken back\
          to well-decked ships, so long-haired Achaeans\
          can bury him and build his funeral mound\
          on the banks of the broad Hellespont.\
[100] Then people born in years to come who sail                                  \
          their ships with many oars on the wine-dark sea\
          will say,          \
\
          \'91This is the funeral mound of some man\
          who died long ago, the best of warriors,\
          killed by glorious Hector.\'92          \
\
          That\'92s what they\'92ll say.                                                 \
          And then my glory will never fade away.\'94          \
\
          Hector finished. The Achaeans all grew silent,\
          ashamed to duck the challenge, afraid to answer it.\
          At last Menelaus, sick at heart, stood up to speak,\
          reproaching them with bitter words of shame:          \
\
[110] \'93Alas, you boasters, you\'92re Achaean women,                                  \
          not men. This shame will mean total disgrace,\
          unless some Danaan now stands up to Hector.\
          All of you sitting here, without heart,\
          disgraced like this, may all of you dissolve,\
          disintegrate to earth and water.                                                                   \
          I\'92ll personally take up arms myself.\
          I\'92ll fight Hector. The rope that\'92s tied\
          to victory comes from heaven above,\
          from the hands of the immortal gods.\'94          \
\
[120] This said, Menelaus pulled his fine armour on.                                      \
          And then, Menelaus, they would\'92ve seen you die\
          at Hector\'92s hands\'97he was by far the stronger man\'97\
          if wide-ruling Agamemnon, son of Atreus,\
          king of the Achaeans, had not hurried up,\
          grabbed you by your right hand, and said these words:          \
\
          \'93Lord Menelaus, have you lost your mind?\
          There\'92s no need for you to act so foolishly.                                                \
          Be patient, even though you\'92re disappointed.\
          Don\'92t volunteer from mere love of battle\
[130] to fight someone better than yourself,                                            \
          for Hector, son of Priam, is a man\
          whom other men avoid. Even Achilles,\
          a far better man than you, was hesitant\
          to meet Hector in fights where men win fame.\
          So go now, sit down with your companions.\
          Achaeans will send out another man\
          as champion against Hector. Though he\'92s fearless,\
          with boundless appetite for battle,\
          I think he\'92ll be content to take a rest,\
[140] if he survives this combat, this grim fight.\'94                                              \
\
          Agamemnon\'92s prudent speech changed his brother\'92s mind.                              \
          Menelaus was convinced, and his attendants\
          gladly pulled the armour off his shoulders.\
          Then Nestor, standing up before the Argives, said:          \
\
          \'93Alas, what great sorrow for Achaea!\
          Old horseman Peleus would cry with grief,\
          noble counsellor of the Myrmidons.\
          When I was in his house, he loved to talk with me,\
          asking questions about men\'92s families,\
[150] the ancestry of all Achaeans. If he knew                                          \
          these warriors were all afraid of Hector,\
          he\'92d keep lifting up his dear hands in prayer                                              \
          to the immortal gods that his spirit\
          leave his body and go down to Hades\'92 home.\
          By father Zeus, Athena, and Apollo,\
          would I were as young as when the Pylian\
          and Arcadian spearmen gathered to fight\
          by the walls of Pheia, beside the banks\
          of the fast-flowing river Celadon.\
[160] Ereuthalion then stepped forward                                                    \
          as their champion, a godlike soldier,\
          wearing on his shoulders the armour\
          of king Areithous\'97that noble Areithous,\
          whom men and well-dressed women gave\
          the name of Mace-man, because he fought,\
          not with long spear or bow, but with an iron mace.                                  \
          With that he smashed down ranks of warriors.\
          Lycurgus killed him, not in a fair fight,\
          but by a trick, in a narrow place,\
[170] where the iron mace could not protect him                                    \
          from destruction. Lycurgus anticipated\
          Areithous\'92 blow and struck him first,\
          a spear thrust in the belly. He fell down,\
          dropping to the ground upon his back.\
          Lycurgus then stripped off the armour\
          which brazen Ares had given Areithous.\
          Lycurgus himself wore it in later fights.\
          And then, when he\'92d grown old in his own home,\
          he gave the armour to Ereuthalion,\
[180] his loyal attendant, who wore it as his own.                                             \
          That\'92s the armour he had on at that time,\
          when he challenged all our finest men.\
          They held back, afraid, not daring to accept.\
          But my spirit, full of fighting confidence,\
          incited me to take him on in battle.\
          By birth I was the youngest of them all.\
          I fought him, and Athena gave me glory.\
          I killed their biggest and most powerful man,\
          left his huge body sprawling on the ground.\
[190] Would I were that young now, my strength as firm.                     \
          Hector of the shining helmet would soon have\
          a man to fight. But now you warriors here,\
          although the finest of Achaean men,\
          aren\'92t keen at all to face up to Hector.\'94                                                                 \
\
          Old man Nestor shamed them. Nine men in all stood up.\
          First to rise, well before the rest, was Agamemnon,\
          king of men. Strong Diomedes, son of Tydeus,\
          jumped up after him. Next came the two Ajaxes,\
          men clothed in an impetuous ferocity.\
[200] Then Idomeneus, his comrade Meriones,                                                 \
          and Eurypylus, Eumaeon\'92s fine son, then Thoas,\
          son of Andraemon, then lord Odysseus.\
          They were all willing volunteers to fight with Hector.\
          Geranian horseman Nestor spoke out once again:                                                        \
\
          \'93To choose, you must cast lots. Shake them well.\
          The chosen man will greatly benefit\
          well-armed Achaeans and his own heart, too\'97\
          if he comes away from this grim fight,\
          this dangerous combat.\'94          \
\
          Nestor spoke. The nine men\
[210] marked their lots and threw them in Agamemnon\'92s helmet.                \
          Troops held up their hands, praying to the gods, saying,\
          as they gazed up at wide heaven:          \
\
          \'93Father Zeus,\
          let the choice fall on Ajax, or Tydeus\'92 son,\
          or on Mycenae\'92s king, rich in gold.\'94                                                                       \
\
          Geranian horseman Nestor shook the helmet.\
          From it fell out the very lot men were hoping for,\
          the one for Ajax. A herald carried round the lot,\
          showing it to all the best Achaeans in the throng,\
          moving from left to right. But no one took it.\
[220] Each man declined. But when, in passing through the crowd,              \
          the herald came to the one who\'92d scratched his mark\
          upon the lot and thrown it in the helmet,\
          noble Ajax held out his hand. Approaching Ajax,\
          the herald dropped the token in his palm.\
          Ajax looked at the mark and saw that it was his.\
          His heart was happy. Throwing the lot down on the ground                            \
          beside his feet, he said:          \
\
          \'93Friends, this marker here\
          belongs to me. And I\'92m happy in my heart,\
          for I think I\'92ll overcome lord Hector.\
[230] But come, while I put on my battle armour,                                   \
          you should pray to lord Zeus, son of Cronos,\
          but silently, so Trojans don\'92t find out\'97\
          or do it aloud, since we fear no one.\
          No man is going to force me to move off\
          through his power or will, if I don\'92t consent,\
          or through his fighting skill. For I was born\
          and raised in Salamis, so I\'92m no novice.\'94          \
\
          Ajax spoke. Men prayed to lord Zeus, son of Cronos.                                         \
          Gazing up to heaven, they uttered words like these:          \
\
[240] \'93Father Zeus, ruling from Mount Ida,                                              \
          most glorious one, most powerful\'97\
          grant Ajax victory, the winner\'92s triumph.\
          But if you love Hector and look out for him,\
          grant them both equal strength, equal glory.\'94          \
\
          So men prayed. Ajax armed himself in glittering bronze.\
          When all his armour was in place around his body,\
          he moved forward, like some gigantic Ares\
          when he sets off to battle among warriors\
          whom Zeus, son of Cronos, has stirred up for war,                                             \
[250] to fight with that war frenzy which consumes men\'92s hearts.                \
          That\'92s how huge Ajax, bulwark of Achaeans,\
          came up then, a grim smile on his face, moving his feet\
          with giant strides. He clutched a long-shadowed spear.\
          When Argives looked at him, they felt great joy,\
          while the limbs of all the Trojans shook with fear.\
          Even in Hector\'92s chest the heart beat rapidly.\
          But there was nothing he could do to pull back now,\
          retreat into the ranks. For he had made the challenge,\
          made it eagerly. Ajax approached bearing his shield.\
[260] It was like a tower made of bronze, with seven layers,                          \
          each one of ox-hide, a weapon made by Tychius,                                               \
          the best of leather workers, who lived in Hyle.\
          He\'92d made the glittering shield for Ajax from the hides\
          of seven well-fed bulls. On top of these, he\'92d set\
          an eighth layer made of bronze. Telamonian Ajax\
          carried this shield in front of him. He came up,\
          stood quite close to Hector, then spoke out grimly:          \
\
          \'93Hector, now you\'92ll come to recognize,\
          one against one, just what the finest men\
[270] are like among Danaans, not counting                                            \
          Achilles, breaker of men, with his lion\'92s heart.\
          He now lies by his curved sea-worthy ships,\
          angry at Agamemnon, his people\'92s shepherd.                                            \
          But there are lots of us who\'92ll stand against you.\
          So come on then. Let\'92s start this fight.\'94          \
\
          Great Hector of the shining helmet then replied:          \
\
          \'93Noble Ajax, son of Telamon,\
          leader of your people. Don\'92t play with me,\
          as if I were a witless child or woman\
[280] who knows nothing of what war requires.                                      \
          For I understand well how to fight,\
          how to kill men. I know how to shift\
          my tanned leather shield to right or left,\
          to me a crucial skill in fighting battles.\
          I know how to charge into the frenzy                                                          \
          of fast chariots, and I know how to dance\
          to Ares\'92 tune in the grim killing zone.\
          I don\'92t want to hit you with a sneaky shot,\
          not a man like you, but in open combat,\
          if I can manage it.\'94          \
\
[290] Once Hector spoke,                                     \
          he balanced his long-shadowed spear and hurled it.\
          He hit Ajax\'92s fearful seven-layered shield\
          on the outer covering of bronze, its eighth layer.\
          The tireless spear tore its way through six layers.\
          But it stopped at the seventh. Then noble Ajax,\
          in his turn, threw his long-shadowed spear at Hector.\
          His spear hit the even circle of Hector\'92s shield,                                                  \
          broke through the glittering shield, and forced its way\
          through the breast plate and tunic covering his ribs.\
[300] Hector twisted to one side, evading a black fate.                                   \
          The two men then both pulled the long spears from their shields\
          and charged each other, like flesh-eating lions\
          or savage boars, whose strength is inexhaustible.\
          With his spear Hector struck the centre of Ajax\'92s shield,\
          but the bronze did not break through\'97its point bent aside.\
          Then Ajax charged ahead and speared Hector\'92s shield,                                      \
          breaking clean through and striking Hector as he lunged.\
          Its motion slashed at Hector\'92s neck. Dark blood seeped out.\
          But Hector of the shining helmet didn\'92t stop the fight.\
[310] He stepped back, picked up in his powerful hand a rock                       \
          lying there on the plain, a huge black jagged stone.\
          With this he hit Ajax\'92s seven-layered shield\
          on its central boss, making the bronze ring out.\
          Then Ajax, in his turn, seized a much bigger stone,\
          swung it round and threw it with tremendous force.\
          The rock, like a millstone, hit Hector\'92s shield and smashed it.                        \
          Strength drained from Hector\'92s limbs. He was thrown on his back,\
          with his shield pressing him on top, weighing him down.\
          At once Apollo raised him up. Now they would\'92ve fought\
[320] hand to hand with swords, if heralds, those messengers                       \
          of gods and men, had not stepped in, one from Trojans,\
          one from bronze-clad Achaeans\'97two trusted men,\
          Talthybius and Idaios. They held out their staffs,\
          symbols of their herald\'92s office, between the two.\
          Then herald Idaios, a wise prudent man, spoke out:          \
\
          \'93You dear lads, fight no more. End this combat.\
          Cloud-gatherer Zeus cares for you both.                                                     \
          You\'92re both fine fighters. We all know that.\
          But night already is approaching.\
[330] And it\'92s good to be persuaded by the night.\'94                                            \
\
          Telamonian Ajax then said in reply:          \
\
          \'93Idaios, tell Hector here to give the word.\
          For he was keen to challenge our best men.\
          Let him speak first. I\'92ll gladly follow what he says.\'94          \
\
          Great Hector of the shining helmet answered Ajax:          \
\
          \'93Ajax, god has given you size, power,\
          judgment, and you\'92re the strongest with the spear,\
          among Achaeans. For today let\'92s end                                                           \
          our battle combat. We\'92ll fight once again,\
[340] later on, until god decides between us,                                           \
          awarding one of us the victory.\
          For night already is approaching,\
          and it\'92s good to be persuaded by the night.\
          So you can bring joy to all Achaeans\
          by their ships, especially your clansmen,\
          your companions. And I can bring joy\
          to the mighty city of king Priam,\
          to Trojans and women in their trailing gowns.\
          They\'92ll gather in holy processions now,\
[350] giving thanks on my behalf in prayer.                                              \
          But come, let\'92s exchange noteworthy presents\
          with each other, so Trojans and Achaeans\
          may say, \'91These men fought in murderous war                                          \
          but were reconciled and parted friends.\'92\'94          \
\
          This said, Hector gave Ajax a silver-studded sword,\
          along with a scabbard and a well-cut sword belt.\
          Ajax gave Hector a shining purple belt.\
          Then they parted, Ajax going to Achaean troops,\
          Hector rejoining Trojans, who were overjoyed\
[360] to see him return alive, safe and sound,                                                   \
          surviving Ajax\'92s fury, his unconquerable hands.\
          They\'92d given up all hope for Hector\'92s safety.\
          Now they took him back with them into the city.                                                        \
\
          Well-armed Achaeans, for their part, led Ajax,\
          elated by his victory, to lord Agamemnon.\
          When they all came inside the son of Atreus\'92 hut,\
          Agamemnon, king of men, sacrificed an ox,\
          a male five years old, to the exalted son of Cronos.\
          They flayed the beast, prepared and carved it up,\
[370] chopping it skilfully into tiny pieces.                                                        \
          They skewered these on spits, cooked them carefully,\
          and drew them off. This done, they prepared a meal and ate.\
          No one went unsatisfied. All feasted equally.                                                     \
          Wide-ruling Agamemnon, heroic son of Atreus,\
          acknowledged Ajax with the whole back cut of meat.\
          When everyone had had his fill of food and drink,\
          old Nestor spoke up first, outlining for them\
          a plan he had. Earlier his advice had seemed the best.\
          Keeping in mind their common good, he said:          \
\
[380] \'93Son of Atreus, you other Argive leaders,                                        \
          many long-haired Achaeans have been killed.\
          Fierce Ares has scattered their dark blood\
          beside the fair-flowing Scamander river.\
          Their souls have departed down to Hades.                                                 \
          So tomorrow you should call a halt.\
          Stop Achaeans fighting. We should all assemble,\
          then carry off the bodies of the dead\
          with mules and oxen. Then we\'92ll burn them\
          a short distance from our ships, so each of us,\
[390] when we return, may carry back the bones.                                    \
          Let\'92s set up one single common funeral mound\
          close by the fire and angled on the plain.\
          Then with all speed from that mound we\'92ll build\
          some high walls with turrets, to guard us and our ships.\
          In those walls we\'92ll construct tight-fitting gates,\
          so there\'92s a path to drive our chariots through.                                         \
          Outside we\'92ll dig a deep trench close beside it,\
          to enclose the walls and hold out chariots\'97\
          soldiers, too, if those impetuous Trojans\
[400] should ever drive us back in battle.\'94                                                          \
\
          So Nestor spoke. All the kings approved his plan.          \
\
          Meanwhile the Trojans were meeting on the city heights,\
          by Priam\'92s palace doors\'97they were confused and fearful.\
          Antenor, a wise counselor, was the first to speak:          \
\
          \'93Listen to me, you Trojans, Dardan allies,\
          so I may say what the heart in my chest prompts.\
          Come now, let\'92s give back Argive Helen                                                     \
          and her possessions to the sons of Atreus\
          for them to keep. We\'92ve broken the truce\
[410] and are fighting once again, so I don\'92t see                                       \
          how things will work out very well for us,\
          unless we carry out what I propose.\'94          \
\
          Antenor spoke, then sat down. Before them all,\
          lord Alexander, husband of fair-haired Helen,\
          stood up to reply. His words had wings:          \
\
          \'93Antenor,\
          I\'92m not pleased with what you\'92ve said.\
          You know very well how to think up\
          some alternative, some better plan.\
          But if you truly mean what you\'92ve just said,\
[420] the gods themselves have muddled up your wits.                                   \
          Now I\'92ll speak to horse-taming Trojans.\
          I flatly refuse. I won\'92t give up my wife.\
          But I will surrender all the goods\
          I carried back from Argos to our home.\
          I\'92m willing to give up all of it,\
          even to add to it things of my own.\'94          \
\
          Paris spoke, then sat back down. Priam stood up,\
          descendant of Dardanus, wise as the gods.\
          Thinking of their common cause, he spoke out:          \
\
[430] \'93Listen to me, Trojans, Dardan allies,                                              \
          so I may state what the heart in my chest prompts.\
          You should prepare your dinner and then eat,                                           \
          here in the city, as before. But remember\'97\
          keep sentries posted. Each man should stay awake.\
          Tomorrow morning Idaios should go\
          to the hollow ships, to tell the sons of Atreus,\
          both Agamemnon and Menelaus,\
          what Alexander has just now proposed,\
          the very man whose cause launched this dispute.\
[440] Idaios should propose this wise suggestion\'97                               \
          if they\'92ll consent to postpone grim warfare,\
          so we can burn our dead, we\'92ll fight later,\
          until god adjudicates between us\
          and awards one side the victory.\'94          \
\
          They heard what Priam said and readily agreed.\
          Throughout the army, in the ranks, they ate their dinner.                                          \
\
          At dawn Idaios went out to the hollow ships.\
          There he found Danaans, companions of Ares,\
          assembled by the stern of Agamemnon\'92s ship.\
[450] The loud-voiced herald, standing in their midst, spoke out:                          \
\
          \'93Son of Atreus, other Achaean leaders,\
          Priam and other noble Trojans asked me\
          to tell you what Alexander has proposed,\
          if that meets with your approval, an offer\
          you will want to hear. That man began our strife.\
          All the property which Paris brought here\
          in his hollow ships to Troy\'97how I wish                                                     \
          he\'92d died before that day!\'97he\'92ll hand over\
          and add more goods from his own home.\
[460] But he says he\'92ll not return that noble lady,                                   \
          wife of Menelaus, though the Trojans wish\
          he\'92d do that. There\'92s more. My orders tell me\
          to speak to you to see if you are willing\
          to put a stop to the harsh clash of war,\
          until such time as we have burned our dead.\
          We will fight later, until god chooses\
          between us, makes one of us the victors.\'94          \
\
          Idaios spoke. They all remained silent, speechless.\
          At last Diomedes, skilled at war shouts, cried out:          \
\
[470] \'93Let no man now accept Alexander\'92s stuff,                                               \
          nor Helen. For it\'92s quite clear, even to a fool,\
          the Trojans are tied down to lethal fate.\'94          \
\
          Diomedes spoke. All Achaea\'92s sons roared out,\
          approving what horse-taming Diomedes said.\
          Mighty Agamemnon then addressed Idaios:          \
\
          \'93Idaios, you yourself have heard our answer,\
          what Achaeans think of what you offer.\
          And I agree with them. But I don\'92t object\
          to burning corpses, for when men die,\
[480] one should not deny the bodies of the dead                                   \
          a swift propitiation in the flames.                                                                \
          So let Zeus, Hera\'92s loud-thundering husband,\
          stand as witness here to our pledged word.\'94          \
\
          Saying this, Agamemnon held up his sceptre,\
          invoking all the gods. Idaios then returned,\
          going back to sacred Ilion. There the Trojans\
          and Dardanians were seated in a meeting,\
          a general assembly, awaiting his return.\
          He came, stood in their midst, and delivered his report.\
[490] Then they quickly organized two working parties\'97                              \
          some to gather bodies, others to get firewood.          \
\
          Argives also moved swiftly from their well-decked ships.\
          Some hurried to bring in the dead, others to find wood.                                   \
          Just as the sun began to shine down on the fields,\
          rising from the gently flowing Ocean depths,\
          climbing in the sky, the two groups met each other.\
          At that point it was hard to recognize each dead man.\
          They washed blood off with water and piled them onto carts,\
          shedding hot tears. Great Priam did not permit\
[500] his Trojans to lament. So they heaped the corpses                                 \
          on the pyre in silence, hearts full of anguish.\
          Once they\'92d burned the bodies, they went back to sacred Troy.\
          Opposite them, in the same way, well-armed Achaeans                                   \
          heaped their dead up on a pyre, sick at heart, burned them,\
          and then returned back to their hollow ships.          \
\
          Next day, just before dawn, still at night, in half light,\
          a chosen group of Achaeans was awake around the pyre.\
          Beside it, on an angle, they made a common grave,\
          back from the plain. From that mound they built a wall,\
[510] with high towers, to defend them and their ships.                                 \
          Inside the rampart they set close-fitting gates,\
          to make a passage so chariots could pass through.\
          Outside the wall they dug a big ditch, wide and deep,                                       \
          close to the rampart, setting stakes down in the trench.          \
\
          As long-haired Achaeans worked, gods sitting beside Zeus,\
          lord of lightning, gazed down on the huge construction,\
          the project undertaken by bronze-armed Achaeans.\
          Earthshaker Poseidon was the first to speak:          \
\
          \'93Father Zeus, will any mortal man\
[520] on boundless earth, after this event,                                                \
          inform gods of his plans, of his intentions?\
          Don\'92t you see that long-haired Achaeans\
          have built a new wall to protect their ships,\
          dug a ditch around it, and yet have made\
          no splendid sacrifice to us, the gods?                                                          \
          The fame of this wall will reach everywhere,\
          as far as light of dawn. People will forget\
          that wall which Phoebus Apollo and myself\
          worked hard to build for heroic Laomedon.\'94*          \
\
[530] Cloud-gatherer Zeus, quite irked, answered Poseidon:                                    \
\
          \'93Such talk from you, mighty Earthshaker, is silly.\
          Another god might well fear this design,\
          some god with a far less powerful hand,\
          a weaker spirit than your own. Your fame\
          will reach as far as the shining light of dawn.\
          Come now, when the long-haired Achaeans leave,\
          sailing their ships to their dear native land,                                               \
          you can smash their wall, take it out to sea,\
          bury the great shore under sand, and so erase\
[540] that great Achaean wall completely.\'94                                                        \
\
          As the gods discussed these things amongst themselves,\
          the sun went down and Achaeans finished working.\
          They slaughtered oxen by their huts and ate their dinner.\
          Many ships had come, bringing wine from Lemnos,\
          sent by Jason\'92s son Euneus\'97born to Jason,\
          his people\'92s shepherd, from Hypsipyle.\
          Euneus had donated wine, a thousand measures,\
          to go to Agamemnon and Menelaus.                                                                    \
          From these ships long-haired Achaeans bought their wine.\
[550] Some bartered with bronze, some with shiny iron,                                \
          others with hides, live oxen, or with slaves.\
          And then the men prepared a sumptuous banquet.\
          Long-haired Achaeans feasted all night long,\
          as did Trojans and their allies in the city,\
          while throughout the night, Counsellor Zeus,\
          thundering ominously, plotted bad things for them.\
          Pale fear gripped men. They kept pouring wine from goblets\
          onto the ground. No one dared to drink before he made                                   \
          an offering to Zeus, almighty son of Cronos.\
          Then they went to bed, to receive the gift of sleep.}