{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf460
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural\qc

\f0\fs24 \cf0 Book Eight\
The Trojans Have Success\

\i \
[At a council on Olympus, Zeus decides to favour the Trojans, leaves for Ida, and holds up the golden scales; Diomedes comes to Nestor's help; Diomedes confronts Hector; Zeus stops Diomedes with a lightning bolt; Hera tries to get Poseidon to plot against Zeus; Agamemnon's speech to rally the troops; Zeus sends an omen to encourage the Argives; the Argives rally; Teucer's success against the Trojans; Hector wounds Teucer, drives him from the battle; Hera and Athena set out to help the Achaeans; Zeus sends Iris to stop them; Hector's speech to his troops the night before the big battle; Trojans sacrifice to the gods]
\i0 \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural
\cf0            \
          \
          As Dawn first spread her yellow robe across the earth,\
          thunder-loving Zeus summoned an assembly of the gods\
          on the highest crest of many-ridged Olympus.\
          Zeus himself addressed them. The other deities,\
          those ranked below him, listened carefully.\
          \
          \'93Hear me, all you gods and goddesses,\
          I\'92ll speak what the spirit in my chest prompts.\
          And let no female god, no male one either,\
          seek to thwart my plan. Let\'92s get agreement\
  [10] from all of you to end this matter quickly.                                              \
          If I see any of you breaking ranks of gods,\
          keen to assist the Trojans or Danaans,\
          that god I\'92ll beat up ignominiously\
          and send back to Olympus. Or I\'92ll seize him\
          and pitch him into black Tartarus, way down,\
          into the deepest pit below the earth,\
          where the gates are iron, the threshold bronze,\
          as far below Hades as heaven lies\
          above the earth. Then he\'92ll acknowledge\
  [20] just how strong I am, the strongest of all gods.                              \
          Come on, try it\'97then everyone will know.\
          Take a golden cord, hang it from heaven.\
          Let gods and goddesses, all together,                                                          \
          grab hold of one end of it and pull.\
          You\'92d not drag Zeus, the highest counsellor,\
          down from heaven to the ground, never,\
          no matter how hard you tried to do it.\
          But when I wished to pull in earnest,\
          I\'92d yank up earth itself, the sea as well.\
  [30] I\'92d loop that cord round some Olympian peak                               \
          and hang it in mid-air\'97the whole of it.\
          I\'92m that much stronger than the gods and men.\'94\
          \
          Zeus finished. All the gods were speechless, shocked\
          at what Zeus had said, at the power of his tone.\
          At last Athena, the bright-eyed goddess, spoke up:                                           \
          \
          \'93Son of Cronos, you\'92re the father of us all,\
          highest ruling force. We well know your strength.\
          It\'92s invincible. Still, we\'92re sorry for the troops,\
          Danaan spearmen dying, suffering dreadful fates.\
  [40] But we\'92ll stand apart from battle, as you wish,                              \
          although we\'92ll give the Argives our advice,\
          help them, to prevent destruction of them all,\
          just to answer your displeasure.\'94\
          \
          Cloud-gatherer Zeus, smiling at Athena, said:\
          \
          \'93My dear child Tritogeneia, have no fears.\
          I wasn\'92t speaking all that seriously.\
          I want to treat you in a friendly way.\'94                                                          \
          \
          Zeus harnessed his two horses, swift-flying animals,\
          with hooves of bronze and flowing golden manes.\
  [50] He encased his body all in gold, took up his whip,                                 \
          a gold one, finely crafted, climbed in his chariot,\
          then lashed the horses onward. They flew off eagerly.\
          Midway between the earth and starry heaven,\
          Zeus reached Mount Ida with its many springs,\
          mother of wild beasts. He reached Gargaros,\
          site of his grove and temple, fragrant with sacrifice.\
          There, the father of gods and men reined in his horses,\
          untied them from the chariot, and hid them in thick cloud.                             \
          Then he sat on the mountain peak, proud and splendid,\
  [60] gazing down on the Trojan city, the Achaean ships.                                \
          \
          Long-haired Achaeans gulped a quick meal by their huts.\
          Then they armed themselves. On the other side, in town,\
          Trojans, too, prepared for war, fewer in number,\
          but keen to fight on in the killing zone, a grim necessity,\
          for wives and children. They threw open all the gates.\
          The army streamed out, foot soldiers and charioteers,\
          making a huge din. As the two groups moved out                                              \
          to the same spot, they crashed together, smashing shields\
          and spears, the battle frenzy of bronze-armed warriors.\
  [70] Embossed shields collided one against the other,                                    \
          a tremendous noise. Screams of pain and triumph\
          came from soldiers\'97those killing, those being killed\'97\
          and the earth was saturated with their blood.\
          \
          In early morning, as that sacred day grew stronger,\
          weapons hurled by both sides grimly took their toll\'97\
          men kept on dying. But when the sun was at its height,\
          Father Zeus set up his golden balance, placed on it\
          two fatal destinies, one for horse-taming Trojans,                                             \
          one for bronze-armed Achaeans. Gripping the scales,\
  [80] he raised them by the centre. One scale sank down,                              \
          the one which held the Achaeans\'92 fate that day\'97\
          it moved down towards the all-sustaining earth,\
          while the Trojans\'92 fate rose up toward wide heaven.\
          From Mount Ida, Zeus sent out a loud thunder clap\
          and hurled a lighting bolt down on Achaean troops.\
          Men looked and were astounded. Pale fear gripped them all.\
          At that, Idomeneus did not dare to stand his ground,\
          nor did Agamemnon, nor the two men named Ajax,\
          companions of the war god Ares. Only Nestor,                                                   \
  [90] the Geranian, guardian of Achaeans,                                                         \
          kept his place, but not because he wanted to.\
          One of his horses had been hurt, hit by an arrow\
          on its head, right on top, that spot where on a horse\
          hairs start to grow out from the skull, a deadly place.\
          The arrow had been loosed by Alexander,\
          lovely Helen\'92s mate. The beast reared up in agony,\
          as the arrow pierced its brain. Skewered by the shaft,\
          the beast\'92s convulsions confused the other horses.\
          While old Nestor with his sword was hacking feverishly\
[100] to cut the traces holding the animal in place,                                          \
          Hector\'92s fast horses came through the fighting men,                                         \
          bearing Hector with them and their bold charioteer.\
          Nestor would have died right there, if Diomedes,\
          skilled in war cries, hadn\'92t seen him right away.\
          He let out a loud shout to Odysseus, urging him\
          to come to Nestor\'92s help.\
          \
          \'93Noble Odysseus, Laertes\'92 son,\
          you resourceful man, why move away,\
          turning your back on all these flying weapons,\
          like a coward? Watch someone doesn\'92t spear you\
[110] right in the back as you run off. Come on,                                      \
          let\'92s save old man Nestor from wild Hector.\'94\
          \
          Diomedes\'92 words missed godlike, firm Odysseus,\
          who moved off to the Achaeans\'92 hollow ships.\
          Diomedes, though left alone, charged straight ahead,\
          back into the fight. He made a stand right there,                                               \
          in front of old Nestor\'92s chariot, calling out to Nestor,\
          son of Neleus\'97his words had wings.\
          \
          \'93Old man, in this fight\
          these young men are pressing you too hard.\
          Your strength is waning. Old age weighs you down.\
[120] Your attendant\'92s weak, your horses slow.                                       \
          So come on, climb up into my chariot.\
          You\'92ll see how these Trojan horses do,\
          experts in moving to and fro across the plain,\
          in pursuit or flight. I took them from Aeneas.\
          These horses would fill any man with terror.\
          So turn your team over to subordinates.\
          With my two let\'92s charge against the Trojans.                                           \
          Let Hector see how my hand wields a spear.\'94\
          \
          Geranian horseman Nestor followed this suggestion.\
[130] At once, the two strong officers, Sthelenus                                             \
          and noble Eurymedon, took Nestor\'92s horses.\
          The two men climbed up in Diomedes\'92 chariot.\
          Nestor grabbed the shining reins and lashed the horses.\
          They closed in on Hector quickly. Then he, in turn,\
          eager to fight, charged them impetuously.\
          The son of Tydeus threw his spear at Hector.\
          He missed, but struck Hector\'92s companion charioteer,\
          Eniopeus, son of proud Thebaios, in the chest,                                                   \
          right by the nipple, as Eniopeus held the reins.\
[140] He tumbled from the chariot. The swift horses swerved.                      \
          Then strength and spirit left him as he lay there.\
          Savage grief seized Hector for his charioteer,\
          but he left him lying there, for all the pain he felt\
          for his companion. He went to find a substitute,\
          a second driver full of courage. Before long,\
          those horses had another charioteer,\
          for Hector soon ran into Archeptolemos,\
          son of Iphitus, and placed him in the chariot\
          behind swift horses, then handed him the reins.\
          \
[150] At that point irrevocable disaster might have struck                                        \
          the people all penned up in Troy like sheep,\
          if the father of gods and men hadn\'92t kept sharp watch.\
          Sounding a dreadful thunder clap, he loosed his lightning,\
          a dazzling fiery bolt which hit the ground\
          immediately in front of Diomedes\'92 horses.\
          A dreadful flash came from the blazing sulphur.\
          In terror, both horses reared up in their harnesses.\
          Nestor let the shining reins drop from his hands.\
          Feeling fear inside his chest, he cried:\
          \
          \'93Son of Tydeus,\
[160] wheel your sure-footed horses round. Go back.                             \
          Don\'92t you see Zeus is not protecting you?                                                  \
          Today the son of Cronos grants Hector glory.       \
          Tomorrow he\'92ll give victory to us,\
          if that\'92s his will. No man stops Zeus\'92 plans,\
          no one, not even the mightiest warrior.\
          Zeus\'92 force is more powerful by far.\'94\
          \
          Diomedes, expert in war cries, then replied:\
          \
          \'93Everything you say, old man, is true enough.\
          But this brings fearful pain into my heart and chest.\
[170] For Hector then will speak out in Troy.                                          \
          He\'92ll say,\
          \
          \'91The son of Tydeus, in fear of me,\
          scurried off, back to his ships.\'92\
          \
          That\'92s what he\'92ll boast.\
          Then let the wide earth open up for me.\'94                                                    \
          \
          Geranian horseman Nestor answered Diomedes:\
          \
          \'93Son of fiery-hearted Tydeus, why talk like that?\
          Even if he slanders you and calls you coward,\
          he\'92ll not convince the Trojans or Dardanians,\
          or Trojan wives, married partners of brave men\
          you\'92ve thrown into the dirt, still in their prime.\'94\
          \
[180] With these words he turned the sure-footed horses back,                    \
          fleeing through the battle zone. Hector and the Trojans,\
          with a shout, threw volleys of lethal weapons at them.\
          Hector with his glittering helmet then yelled out:\
          \
          \'93Son of Tydeus,                                                           \
          fast-riding Danaans at their banquets\
          have awarded you a place of honour,\
          with lots of meat, a wine cup always full.\
          Now they\'92re ashamed of you. You\'92ve turned out\
          no better than a woman. Run off then,\
          you coward girl. I\'92ll not back away,\
[190] let you climb our walls, or take our women.                                  \
          Before that happens, I\'92ll send you to your death.\'94\
          \
          At Hector\'92s words, the son of Tydeus was torn two ways,\
          debating whether to wheel the horses round and fight,\
          face Hector man to man. Three times he thought it through                            \
          in his mind and heart, and three times Counsellor Zeus\
          pealed thunder from Mount Ida, signalling to Trojans\
          that victory now would shift to them. Then Hector,\
          with a great shout, cried out to his Trojan warriors:\
          \
          \'93You Trojans, Lycians, and Dardanians\'97\
[200] soldiers who fight in the killing zone\'97                                          \
          my friends, be men. Summon your warlike spirit.\
          I see the son of Cronos grants us victory,\
          great glory, a disaster for Danaans.\
          What fools they were to build this feeble wall,\
          a puny hazard\'97it will not check me,\
          my warlike spirit. As for the trench they dug,\
          my horses will jump over that with ease.\
          When I reach their hollow ships, don\'92t forget the fire,                              \
          which wipes out everything I\'92ll burn their fleet,\
[210] slaughter them, those Argives by their ships,                                \
          as they suffocate, choking on the smoke.\'94\
          \
          And Hector urged his horses on, saying these words:\
          \
          \'93Xanthus, and you Podargus, Aithus,\
          noble Lampus! Now\'92s the time to pay me back\
          for all my care, all the sweet grain you\'92ve had\
          from Andromache, great E\'ebtion\'92s daughter,\
          for the wine she\'92s mixed for you to drink,\
          whenever you desired. She took care of you,\
          even before me, her own fine husband.                                                       \
[220] Come on then, go after them with speed,                                       \
          so we may capture Nestor\'92s shield, whose fame\
          extends right up to heaven\'97it\'92s all gold\'97\
          the shield itself, cross braces, too.\
          From horse-taming Diomedes\'92 shoulders\
          we\'92ll strip the decorated body armour,\
          a work created by Hephaestus.\
          I think if we could capture these two things,\
          Achaeans would climb aboard their ships tonight.\'94\
          \
          So Hector bragged. That made queen Hera angry.\
[230] She shook with fury, sitting on her throne,                                             \
          making high Olympus tremble. Then she spoke out\
          to great god Poseidon:\
          \
          \'93Alas, great Earthshaker,                                                      \
          don\'92t you feel any anguish in your heart,\
          as Danaans are destroyed? After all,\
          they bring you presents, many pleasing gifts,\
          to Helice and Aegae. Don\'92t you want them to win?\
          Now, if all those of us who protect Danaans\
          were to agree to drive the Trojans back,\
          we\'92d leave wide-seeing Zeus up there by himself,\
[240] sulking where he sits alone on Ida\'94                                                  \
          \
          Mighty Earthshaker Poseidon, very angry,\
          answered Hera:\
          \
          \'93Hera, you fearless talker,\
          What are you saying? That\'92s not what I want,\
          the rest of us to war on Zeus, son of Cronos.                                              \
          For he is much more powerful than us.\'94\
          \
          As the two gods talked together in this way,\
          horses and shield-bearing troops were jammed together,\
          crammed into the space encircled by the ditch,\
          from ships to wall, pinned down there by Hector, Priam\'92s son,\
[250] like swift Ares, now that Zeus was giving him the glory.                       \
          And then he would\'92ve burned those well-balanced ships\
          with searing fire on the spot, if queen Hera\
          had not set a plan in Agamemnon\'92s mind\
          to rouse Achaeans with all speed on his own.\
          He strode through Achaean huts and ships,                                                         \
          holding a huge purple cloak in his large fists.\
          He took up a position by Odysseus\'92 ship,\
          a black vessel, broad in the beam, whose place,\
          in the middle of the row, allowed his voice\
[260] to reach both ends of the line, from the huts of Ajax,                            \
          son of Telamon, to those belonging to Achilles,\
          for these two men had placed their balanced ships\
          at either end, relying on their courage and strong hands.*\
          Agamemnon, from that spot, then shouted out,\
          making himself heard to all Danaans:\
          \
          \'93You Argives! What a shameful bunch of men!\
          Splendid to look at, but a sour disgrace!\
          What\'92s happened to our sworn oaths, when we claimed\
          we were the best, the bravest? Idle boasters!\
[270] In Lemnos, as you stuffed yourselves with meat                                     \
          from straight-horned cattle and drank bowls of wine,\
          foaming to the brim, you talked of how you\'92d stand,\
          each and every one of you, firm in battle\
          against a hundred or two hundred Trojans.\
          Now we\'92re matched by Hector, just one man,\
          who\'92ll quickly set our ships alight with fire.\
          Father Zeus, have you ever so deluded\
          a high-minded king and stolen his glory?\
          While sailing well-decked ships to this disaster,\
[280] I say I never overlooked your lovely altars.                                    \
          On every one I burned fat and thighs of oxen\'97                                         \
          I was so keen to conquer Troy, its well-made walls.\
          But Zeus, grant me now at least this prayer\'97\
          let us get out of here alive, in safety.\
          Don\'92t let Trojans kill Achaeans off like this.\'94\
          \
          As Agamemnon spoke, tears streaming down his face\
          Father Zeus pitied him and nodded his assent\'97\
          the army would be saved and not demolished.\
          At once Zeus sent the surest of all bird omens,\
[290] an eagle, gripping in its talons a young fawn,                                          \
          child of some swift deer. The eagle released the fawn,\
          dropping it right beside that splendid altar                                                           \
          where Achaeans sacrificed to all-knowing Zeus.\
          Seeing that Zeus had sent the bird, men resumed the fight,\
          attacking Trojans eagerly, their battle spirits roused.\
          \
          Then none of those many Danaans there could claim\
          he was quicker with his horses than Diomedes,\
          driving them ahead and charging through the ditch,\
          to confront their enemies face to face and fight.\
[300] Well ahead of all the rest, Diomedes killed his man,                             \
          a well-armed Trojan, Agelaus, son of Phradmon.\
          He\'92d turned his team around to get away.\
          But once he showed his back, Diomedes speared him\
          between his shoulder blades, driving through his chest.\
          He fell from the chariot, armour rattling round him.                                         \
          After Diomedes, the sons of Atreus came charging in,\
          Agamemnon and Menelaus, and after them\
          both Ajaxes, encased in war\'92s ferocity,\
          followed by Idomeneus and his attendant,\
[310] Meriones, the equal of man-killing Ares.                                                 \
          Then came Eurypylus, brave son of Euaemon.\
          Ninth came Teucer, stretching his curved bow.\
          He stood beneath the shield of Ajax, son of Telamon.\
          As Ajax cautiously pulled his shield aside,\
          Teucer would peer out quickly, shoot off an arrow,\
          hit someone in the crowd, dropping that soldier\
          right where he stood, ending his life\'97then he\'92d duck back,                             \
          crouching down by Ajax, like a child beside its mother.\
          Ajax would then conceal him with his shining shield.\
[320] Who were the first Trojans skilful Teucer killed?                                  \
          Orsilochus died first, then Ormenus, Ophelestes,\
          Daitor, Chromius, godlike Lycophontes,\
          Amopaon, son of Polyaimon, and Melanippus\'97\
          all these Teucer dropped one by one on fertile earth.\
          Watching him cause havoc with his bow in Trojan ranks,\
          Agamemnon, king of men, was overjoyed.\
          He went up, stood beside him, then spoke out:                                                  \
          \
          \'93Teucer, son of Telamon, master of your people,\
          my dear comrade, keep on shooting as you\'92re doing.\
[330] You\'92ll be a saving light to the Danaans,                                          \
          and to your father Telamon, who raised you,\
          took care of you, a bastard, in his own home.\
          Though he\'92s far off, cover him with glory now.\
          For I\'92ll tell you something\'97and this will happen\'97\
          if Athena and aegis-bearing Zeus permit me\
          to devastate that well-built city Ilion,\
          you\'92ll be the first to take the prize of honour,\
          after me, of course\'97a tripod, two horses,                                                  \
          their chariot as well, or some woman\
[340] to climb up into your bed with you.\'94                                               \
          \
          Skilful Teucer then replied to Agamemnon:\
          \
          \'93Mighty son of Atreus, why urge me on?\
          I\'92m eager to continue shooting.\
          Since we first drove them back to Ilion,\
           I\'92ve not stopped fighting as hard as I know how,\
          cutting men down with my bow and killing them.\
          I\'92ve shot off eight long-barbed arrows. Each one\
          has sunk itself deep inside a soldier\'92s flesh,\
          some strong, swift warrior. But this man,\
[350] Hector, I can\'92t hit. He\'92s like some crazy dog.\'94                                \
          \
          With that, Teucer launched another arrow from his bowstring,                       \
          directly facing Hector, eager to hit him.\
          The arrow missed, but struck handsome Gorgythion,\
          son of Priam, in the chest, a man whose mother,\
          lovely Castianeira, divinely beautiful,\
          went from Aisyme to become a wife to Priam.\
          Just as the head on a garden poppy leans aslant,\
          loaded down with heavy seed and spring rain showers,\
          so Gorgythion\'92s head sagged under his helmet\'92s weight.\
[360] Teucer loosed yet another arrow from his bowstring,                            \
          straight at Hector, his spirit still keen to hit him.                                              \
          Again he missed, for Apollo deflected it.\
          But the arrow did hit Archeptolemos,\
          Hector\'92s bold driver, as he was coming to the fight.\
          It struck him in the chest, right by the nipple.\
          He fell from the chariot. The fast horses swerved.\
          Then and there his strength and spirit abandoned him.\
          In his heart Hector felt sharp pain for his charioteer,\
          but he left him there, though grieving for his comrade.\
[370] He called out to his brother Cebriones,                                                    \
          who was near by, to take up the chariot reins.\
          Cebriones heard him and willingly agreed.\
          Hector jumped down from his glittering chariot                                                \
          with a fearful yell. Picking up a boulder\
          lying on the ground, he went straight at Teucer,\
          his heart aroused to hit him with it. At that moment,\
          Teucer had just taken a sharp arrow from his quiver,\
          set it on the bowstring, and was drawing back the bow,\
          once again desperately eager to hit Hector.\
[380] But Hector struck him with that jagged rock                                           \
          right on the shoulder, where collar bones divide\
          neck from chest, an especially vulnerable spot.\
          The rock broke the bowstring and numbed his hands and wrists.\
          Teucer fell forward on his knees and stayed there,\
          letting his bow fall from his hand. Seeing his brother down,\
          Ajax quickly hurried up and straddled Teucer,                                                    \
          covering him with his shield. Two loyal attendants,\
          Mecisteus, son of Echios, and noble Alastor,\
          hoisted Teucer up\'97he was groaning heavily\'97\
[390] then took him with them back to the hollow ships.                               \
          \
          Once more Olympian Zeus put force into the Trojans.\
          They drove Achaeans back, right back to their deep trench,\
          Hector at the front, proudly showing off his strength.\
          Just as some hunting dog in a swift-footed chase\
          gets a grip on a wild boar or lion from the back,\
          on the flank or rump, and watches that beast\'92s every move,                             \
          that\'92s how Hector harried the long-haired Achaeans,\
          always killing off the stragglers as they fled.\
          By the time Achaeans had rushed through the stakes,\
[400] as they crossed the ditch, many had died at Trojan hands.                   \
          At last they halted by the ships and stayed there,\
          calling out to one another. Raising their hands,\
          each man prayed fervently to all the gods.\
          Hector drove his fine-maned horses back and forth,\
          his eyes glaring like a Gorgon or man-killing Ares.\
          \
          Seeing all this, white-armed Hera pitied the Achaeans.                                    \
          She quickly spoke these winged words to Athena:\
          \
          \'93Alas, child of aegis-bearing Zeus,\
          Achaeans are being massacred. It\'92s their last stand.\
[410] Aren\'92t we concerned about them any more,                                   \
          as their evil fate accomplishes its purpose?          \
          They\'92re being destroyed by one man\'92s charging frenzy.\
          Hector, son of Priam, is on a rampage.\
          He can\'92t be stopped. He\'92s already done great harm.\'94\
          \
          Bright-eyed goddess Athena answered Hera:\
          \
          \'93I wish Hector somehow would lose his strength\
          and die, killed in his own native land\
          at Argive hands. But my father, too,\
          is in a rage, destruction on his mind.                                                            \
[420] What a wretch he is, always in the way,                                          \
          wrecking my plans. He does not remember\
          how many times I saved Hercules, his son,\
          worn down by work he got from Eurystheus.\
          If I\'92d had the foresight to anticipate\
          what Zeus is doing now when Eurystheus\
          sent Hercules down to the house of Hades,\
          the Gate Keeper, to fetch back from Erebus\
          Hades\'92 dreadful hound, he\'92d never have escaped\
          the deep rushing waters of the river Styx.\
[430] Now Zeus dislikes me. He\'92s carrying out                                        \
          what Thetis wants. She kissed his knee, cupped his chin,                        \
          begged him to grant due honour to Achilles,\
          destroyer of cities. But the day will come\
          when Zeus calls me dear bright eyes once more.\
          Now harness your sure-footed horses for us,\
          while I go to aegis-bearing Zeus\'92 home\
          and arm myself with weapons for this battle,\
          so I may see whether this son of Priam,\
          this Hector of the shining helmet, is pleased\
[440] when we two show up in the battle lanes,                                      \
          or whether some Trojan will make a meal \
          for dogs and birds with flesh and body fat,\
          as he falls there beside Achaean ships.\'94                                                      \
          \
          Athena finished. White-armed Hera agreed with her.\
          Then Hera, honoured goddess, great Cronos\'92 daughter,\
          went off and started harnessing her horses\
          with their golden headpieces. Meanwhile, Athena,\
          daughter of aegis-bearing Zeus, threw her dress\
          down on the floor of her father\'92s house, a soft robe,\
[450] richly embroidered, which she\'92d made with her own hands.                 \
          She pulled on the tunic of cloud-gatherer Zeus\
          and armed herself with weapons for destructive war.\
          Then she stepped up into the flaming chariot,\
          grasping the huge thick strong spear she used to break                                    \
          heroic warrior ranks which had provoked her,\
          making the daughter of a mighty father angry.\
          Hera immediately whipped the horses forward.\
          With a groan, the gates of heaven opened on their own,\
          those gates which the Seasons, custodians of Olympus\
[460] and great heaven, too, look after, pushing open                                     \
          the heavy cloud, then pushing it shut once more.\
          Through these gates the goddesses lashed on their horses.\
          \
          Father Zeus noticed them from Ida. In a huge rage,\
          he sent down gold-winged Iris with a message for them.\
          \
          \'93Off with you, swift Iris. Turn them back again.\
          Don\'92t permit them to come into my presence.\
          For if we come to blows, then we\'92ll have trouble.                                    \
          But I do say this\'97and it will surely happen\'97\
          I\'92ll cripple their fast horses in their traces,\
[470] throw them from the chariot, smash it in pieces.                          \
          Ten revolving years won\'92t be sufficient\
          to cure the wounds my lightning will inflict,\
          so the bright-eyed goddess knows what it means\
          to fight against her father. As for Hera,\
          I\'92m not so angry or upset with her,\
          for no matter what I say, she undermines it.\'94\
          \
          Zeus spoke. Then Iris, swift as a storm, rushed off,\
          taking his message. She came down from Mount Ida                                         \
          and made for high Olympus. She met the goddesses\
[480] at the outer gate of many-ridged Olympus.                                             \
          She stopped them and reported Zeus\'92 message:\
          \
          \'93Where are you rushing off? Have you lost your wits?\
          The son of Cronos has forbidden anyone\
          to assist the Argives. And he\'92s made this threat\'97\
          which he intends to carry out\'97he\'92ll maim\
          your swift horses in their traces, throw you both\
          out of the chariot, smash it in pieces.\
          Ten revolving years won\'92t be sufficient\
          to cure the wounds his lightning will inflict,\
[490] so that you\'92ll understand, bright-eyed goddess,                            \
          what it means to fight against your father.                                                 \
          With Hera\'92s he\'92s not so angry or upset.\
          For no matter what he says, she undermines it.\
          But as for you, you shameless schemer,\
          are you daring to fight Zeus with one large spear?\'94\
          \
          Having said this, swift-footed Iris went away.\
          Hera then said to Athena:\
          \
          \'93What a mess,\
          child of aegis-bearing Zeus! I\'92m not keen,\
          not now, that two of us should take on Zeus\
[500] for the sake of mortal men. Let some die                                       \
          and others live, as chance will work it out.\
          Let Zeus judge between Trojans and Achaeans,                                         \
          as his heart desires. That\'92s how it should be.\'94\
          \
          With these words, she turned her sure-footed horses back.\
          The Seasons unyoked the horses with the lovely manes,\
          led them to their heavenly stalls, and leaned the chariot\
          against the courtyard\'92s luminescent inner wall.\
          The goddesses then sat down on their golden thrones,\
          among the other gods, with anger in their hearts.\
[510] Father Zeus drove his fine-wheeled chariot and horses                         \
          from Ida to Olympus, to the place where gods\
          were all assembled. The famous Earthshaker,\
          Poseidon, loosed his horses from their harness for him,                                   \
          put the chariot on its stand, and covered it with cloth.\
          Then wide-seeing Zeus himself sat on his golden throne.\
          Underneath his feet great Olympus trembled.\
          Athena and Hera were sitting by themselves,\
          away from Zeus, not saying anything to him\
          or asking questions. Knowing what was in their hearts,\
          Zeus spoke:\
          \
[520] \'93Why are you so irritated,                                        \
          Hera and Athena? Surely you\'92re not tired\
          from those fights where men win glory,\
          exhausted after killing off the Trojans,\
          for whom you feel such deadly hatred\
          Be that as it may, such is my power,\
          the strength in my own hands, it\'92s impossible                                           \
          for all the Olympian gods combined\
          to turn me from my purposes. As for you,\
          you both were trembling in your shining limbs\
[530] even before you looked on any fight                                                  \
          or witnessed first-hand war\'92s destructiveness.\
          But I\'92ll tell you what would\'92ve taken place\'97\
          neither of you would\'92ve come back to Olympus,\
          the immortals\'92 home, riding in your chariot.\
          My lightning would have blasted both of you.\'94\
          \
          Zeus finished speaking. Hera and Athena muttered,\
          sitting together, plotting trouble for the Trojans.\
          Athena sat in silence, not saying anything,\
          angry with her father, consumed with rage.                                                         \
[540] But Hera couldn\'92t hold the fury in her chest. She said:                          \
          \
          \'93Dread son of Cronos, what are you saying?\
          We know well enough how strong you are\'97\
          invincible. But nonetheless, we pity\
          Danaan spearmen who are being destroyed,\
          suffering a dreadful fate. But we\'92ll hold back,\
          refrain from fighting, if that\'92s your order.\
          We\'92ll provide useful advice to Argives,\
          so they don\'92t all die from your displeasure.\'94\
          \
          In response to Hera, cloud-gatherer Zeus then said:\
          \
[550] \'93Ox-eyed queen Hera, if you\'92re so inclined,                                               \
          tomorrow morning you can witness\
          the exalted son of Cronos, as he kills\
          many Achaean spearmen in their army.\
          For warlike Hector won\'92t stop fighting,\
          until beside the ships he stirs to action\
          swift Achilles, son of Peleus, on that day\
          they fight with bloody desperation\
          by the ships\'92 sterns\'97they\'92ll be battling over\
          the body of Patroclus. That\'92s been decreed.\
[560] I don\'92t care at all if this annoys you.                                               \
          Even if you descend to the lowest place\
          beneath the earth and sea, where Iapetus\
          and Cronos live, where they get no pleasure\
          in any sunlight from Hyperion,                                                                     \
          or any breeze, in the depths of Tartarus\'97\
          even if you went as far away as that\
          in your wandering, I\'92d still pay no attention\
          to your displeasure. For you\'92ve no rival\
          when it comes to behaving like a bitch.\'94*\
          \
[570] Zeus spoke. White-armed Hera didn\'92t answer him.                               \
          \
          Now the sun\'92s bright light sank down into the ocean,\
          dragging black night over fertile crop lands.\
          The end of daylight made the Trojans sorrowful,\
          but Achaeans welcomed the arrival of black night,\
          something they\'92d been praying for constantly.\
          \
          Then glorious Hector assembled all the Trojans\
          some distance from the ships, by the swirling river,                                          \
          in open ground where there were no corpses in plain view.\
          Jumping from their chariots to the ground, warriors\
[580] listened for what Hector, loved by Zeus, would say.                              \
          In his hand, he gripped a spear eighteen feet long,\
          its bronze point glittering there in front of them,\
          a golden ring around it. Leaning on this spear,\
          Hector then addressed his Trojans:\
          \
          \'93Listen to me,\
          you Trojans, Dardanians, you allies.\
          Just now I stated we\'92d go back to Troy today,\
          once we\'92d destroyed the ships and slaughtered\
          all Achaeans. But darkness intervened.                                                       \
          That\'92s the only thing that spared the Argives\
[590] and saved their ships beached onshore. Come then,                     \
          let\'92s do what black night demands\'97prepare a meal.\
          So from your chariots take out of harness\
          those horses with their lovely manes, feed them,\
          then quickly bring here from the city\
          cattle and stout sheep. Bring sweet wine as well,\
          and bread from your own homes. Get lots of wood,\
          so all night long, until first light of dawn,\
          we can burn many fires, lighting up the sky.\
          Some time in the night, long-haired Achaeans                                          \
[600] may make their move to get away by sea.                                      \
          We must not let them embark easily,\
          without a fight. Let some of them be hit,\
          take something home they need to nurse with care\'97\
          an arrow wound, a slash from some sharp spear\
          as they jump in their ships\'97so someone else\
          will think twice about bringing wretched war\
          upon horse-taming Trojans. Let the call go out\
          from heralds, whom Zeus loves, through all the city,\
          for growing boys and grey-haired men to camp\
[610] up on the city\'92s walls, built by the gods.                                         \
          Let each grown woman get ready a large fire                                             \
          in her home. Let all keep a sharp lookout,\
          to stop a group from entering our city\
          while the army is elsewhere. Do all this,\
          you great-hearted Trojans, just as I\'92ve said.\
          That\'92s all I have to tell you at this time.\
          I\'92ve more orders for horse-taming Trojans\
          for tomorrow. I hope and pray to Zeus,\
          to other gods as well, I\'92ll drive away\
[620] these death-infected dogs, conducted here                                     \
          in their black ships by mortal fates. Right now,\
          let\'92s watch out for ourselves tonight. At dawn,\
          let\'92s arm ourselves with weapons and re-ignite                                         \
          this bitter warfare by the hollow ships.\
          Then I\'92ll know if mighty Diomedes,\
          son of Tydeus, will repel me from the ships,\
          or whether with my bronze I\'92ll slaughter him\
          and take away the spoils all stained with blood.\
          Tomorrow he\'92ll understand how good he is,\
[630] whether he can stand against my spear,                                          \
          as it comes after him. I think he\'92ll fall.\
          He\'92ll be among the first men speared to death,\
          with many of his comrades round him,\
          at tomorrow\'92s sunrise. I wish I were as sure\
          I were immortal, ageless for all time,\
          that I\'92d be worshiped as Athena is,                                                                                                                     \
          and Apollo, too, as I am that this day\
          will bring destruction to the Argives.\'94\
          \
          Hector finished speaking. Trojans gave a shout.\
[640] They untied their sweaty horses from their yokes,                                 \
          tethered them with straps, each by its chariot.\
          From the city they soon brought cattle and stout sheep,\
          sweet wine and bread from home. They gathered piles of wood\
          and made perfect sacrificial offerings to the gods.\
          From the plain, the wind carried the sweet-smelling smoke\
          right up to heaven. But the blessed gods weren\'92t willing                                  \
          to accept it, for sacred Ilion, and Priam,\
          and Priam\'92s people, rich in sheep, did not please them.\
          So all night long men sat there in the battle lanes,\
[650] with high expectations, burning many fires.                                            \
          Just as those times when the stars shine bright in heaven,\
          clustered around the glowing moon, with no wind at all,\
          and every peak and jutting headland, every forest glade\
          is clearly visible, when every star shines out,\
          and the shepherd\'92s heart rejoices\'97that\'92s the way\
          the many Trojan fires looked, as they burned there\
          in front of Ilion, between the river Xanthus                                                         \
          and the ships, a thousand fires burning on the plain.\
          By each sat fifty men in the glow of firelight.\
[660] Horses munched on wheat and barley, standing there                          \
          by their chariots, awaiting the regal splendour of the dawn.}