{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf460
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural\qc

\f0\fs24 \cf0 Book Nine\
Peace Offerings to Achilles          \
\

\i [The Argives in despair; Agamemnon proposes they go home; Diomedes responds, rebuking Agamemnon; Nestor proposes a reconciliation with Achilles; Agamemnon agrees, outlines his offer; Phoenix, Odysseus, and Ajax go to Achilles with the offer; he welcomes them with a meal; Odysseus outlines Agamemnon's offer; Achilles refuses; Phoenix urges Achilles to accept, tells the story of Meleager; Achilles refuses Phoenix; Ajax speaks last; Achilles makes a slight concession; the envoys return with Achilles' answer; Achaeans retire for the night.]    
\i0 \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural
\cf0 \
                     \
\
          Meanwhile, as the Trojans maintained their careful watch,\
          Panic, chilling Fear\'92s dread comrade, gripped Achaeans,\
          their best men suffering unendurable anguish.\
          Just like those times two winds blow in from Thrace\'97\
          North Wind and West Wind suddenly spring up\
          and lash the fish-filled seas\'97black waves at once rise up,\
          then fling seaweed in piles along the shoreline\'97\
          so spirits in Achaean chests were now cast down.\
          Atreus\'92 son, heart overwhelmed with painful sorrow,\
  [10] went to give out orders for clear-voiced heralds                                                  \
          to summon all the warriors to assembly,\
          calling them one by one, not with a general shout.\
          He himself, with his heralds, carried out the task.\
          The counsellors sat heart sick. Agamemnon stood,\
          his face shedding tears like a black water spring\
          whose dark stream flows down a sheer rock precipice.\
          With a sigh, Agamemnon addressed the Argives:          \
\
          \'93My friends, leaders, Argive counsellors,\
          Zeus, son of Cronos, has snared me badly\
  [20] in grievous folly. Deceptive god,                                                      \
          he promised me\'97he nodded his assent\'97\
          that I\'92d lay waste to well-built Ilion,                                                            \
          before I went back home. Now he tricks me\
          He\'92s devised a cruel deceit for me,\
          telling me to return to Argos in disgrace,\
          after the deaths of so many warriors.\
          That\'92s what now delights all-powerful Zeus,\
          who has hurled down so many lofty towns,\
          and who\'92ll still demolish many more\'97\
  [30] such is his power, irresistible.                                                           \
          But come, let\'92s all follow what I propose\'97\
          let\'92s sail back to our dear native land.\
          For we\'92re never going to capture Troy.\'94          \
\
          He finished. All those there stayed silent, stunned.\
          Achaea\'92s sons just sat there, speechless with grief.                                            \
          At last Diomedes, skilled in battle cries, spoke out:          \
\
          \'93Son of Atreus, I\'92ll be the first to challenge\
          your foolishness, as is my right, my lord,\
          in our assembly. So don\'92t be angry.\
  [40] First of all, you slighted my bravery                                                \
          in front of all Danaans, when you claimed\
          I was no soldier, an unwarlike man.\
          Achaeans, young and old, all know this.\
          The son of crooked-minded Cronos gave you\
          a two-edged gift\'97he gave you honour\
          to govern all men with your sceptre,\
          but he didn\'92t give the strongest power,\
          courage. My misguided king, do you think                                                 \
          Achaea\'92s sons are really fearful cowards,\
  [50] as you state? If your heart wishes to go home,                               \
          then go. The road lies there in front of you.\
          The many ships which sailed here with you\
          from Mycenae stand ready by the sea.\
          But the rest of the long-haired Achaeans\
          will stay here, until we demolish Troy.\
          If they flee back to their dear native land\
          in their ships, too, then Sthenelus and I\
          will fight on to our goal, to take Ilion.\
          For the gods were with us when we came.\'94          \
\
  [60] With a roar, all Achaea\'92s sons endorsed his words,                                            \
          pleased with the speech made by horse-taming Diomedes.\
          Then horseman Nestor, standing up before them, said:          \
\
          \'93Son of Tydeus, you\'92re excellent in battle\
          and the best Achaean of your age in council.\
          No Achaean will fault what you\'92ve just said\
          or oppose it. But your speech is incomplete.\
          You are still young\'97you might well be my son,\
          my youngest born. Still, you spoke sensibly,\
          in what you said to the Achaean king.\
  [70] For you spoke justly and kept to the point.                                \
          But come, I can claim to be your senior,                                                     \
          so I shall explain this matter fully.\
          Let no one take issue now with what I say,\
          not even mighty Agamemnon.\
          Any man who\'92s keen on civil war\
          is an evil outlaw, without a heart,\
          without a home. So for the time being,\
          now that night has come, let\'92s do what we must.\
          Let\'92s get dinner ready, something to eat.\
  [80] And let\'92s have sentries camp beside that trench                            \
          we dug outside the wall. I\'92m saying young men\
          should do this. Then, issue your instructions,\
          son of Atreus, for you are chief king here.\
          Prepare a meal for senior counsellors\'97\
          that\'92s the right and proper thing to do.                                                       \
          You\'92ve got lots of wine stockpiled in your huts,\
          which Achaea\'92s sons bring here every day\
          over the wide sea from Thrace\'97you\'92ve got\
          all you need to show such hospitality,\
  [90] for you are ruler over many men.                                                     \
          Once many people have assembled there,\
          you should follow whoever offers you\
          the best advice. All we Achaeans need\
          good practical advice, especially now,\
          when enemies are burning many fires\
          right beside our ships. Who finds that pleasant?\
          This night saves our army or destroys it.\'94          \
\
          Nestor spoke. Those present listened carefully,\
          then followed what he\'92d said. Armed sentinels went out,                                 \
[100] led by Thrasymedes, Nestor\'92s son, his people\'92s shepherd,                    \
          with Ascalaphus and Ialmenus, strong fighters,\
          and Meriones, Aphareus, and De\'efpyrus,\
          along with noble Lycomedes, Creion\'92s son.\
          These seven were captains of the sentinels.\
          A hundred young men, all armed with their long spears,\
          went with each of them. They marched off and took positions\
          half way between the ditch and wall. Then the men lit fires\
          and prepared their meals. Atreus\'92 son led his advisors\
          to his hut and gave all of them a generous meal.                                                \
[110] They ate the food prepared and set before them,                                   \
          and each man ate and drank to his full heart\'92s content.\
          Old Nestor, whose previous advice had seemed the best,\
          was the first to begin explaining what he thought.\
          Keeping in mind their common good, he spoke out:          \
\
          \'93Mighty son of Atreus, Agamemnon,\
          king of men, I\'92ll begin and end my speech\
          with you, for you are lord of many men.\
          Zeus gave you sceptre and laws to rule them.\
          Thus, you, above all, should speak and listen,                                             \
[120] then act upon what other men may say,                                          \
          if their spirit prompts them to speak well.\
          You\'92ll get the credit for what they begin.\
          So I\'92ll say what seems to me the best advice.\
          No one else has set out a better scheme\
          than the one which I\'92ve been mulling over\
          a long time now, ever since you, my lord,\
          made Achilles angry by taking back\
          that young girl Briseis from his hut,\
          against my judgment. Repeatedly,\
[130] I urged you not to do it. But then you,                                             \
          surrendering to your arrogant spirit,\
          shamed our strongest man, honoured by the gods.                                   \
          You still have that prize you took. So now let\'92s think\
          how we may make amends, win him back with gifts\
          and gracious speeches, and be friends once more.\'94          \
\
          Agamemnon, king of men, then answered Nestor:          \
\
          \'93Old man, you expose my folly justly.\
          I was deluded. I don\'92t deny that.\
          The man whom Zeus loves in his heart is worth\
[140] whole armies. And this man Zeus now honours                            \
          by destroying an army of Achaeans.\
          Since my delusion made me follow\
          my mistaken feelings, I\'92m now willing\
          to make amends, to give in recompense                                                     \
          immense treasures. I\'92ll list these rich gifts\
          in presence of you all\'97seven tripods\
          which fire has not yet touched, ten gold talents,\
          twenty shining cauldrons, twelve strong horse\
          whose speed has triumphed and earned them prizes.\
[150] A man who has as much as I have won                                            \
          from racing these sure-footed animals\
          would not be poor, or lack possessions,\
          or need precious gold. And then I\'92ll give him\
          seven women of Lesbos, skilled in crafts,\
          whom I chose for myself when he captured\
          well-built Lesbos. They surpass all women                                                \
          for their beauty. These I shall present to him.\
          With them the one I seized from him, Briseis,\
          daughter of Briseus. I\'92ll solemnly swear\
[160] I never once went up into her bed                                                    \
          or had sex with her, as is men\'92s custom,\
          where men and women are concerned.\
          All these things he will receive immediately.\
          If gods grant we destroy Priam\'92s great city,\
          when we Achaeans allocate the spoils,\
          let him come and load his ship with gold,\
          with bronze, as much as he desires. He may choose\
          twenty Trojan women for himself,\
          the loveliest after Argive Helen.                                                                   \
[170] If we get back to the rich land of Argos,                                          \
          he can then become my son-in-law.\
          I\'92ll honour him just as I do Orestes,\
          my son, whom I dearly love. He\'92s being raised\
          in great prosperity. In my well-built home,\
          I have three daughters\'97Chrysothemis,\
          Iphianessa and Laodice.\
          He can take whichever one he chooses\
          back home as his wife to Peleus\'92 house\
          and pay no bridal gift. I\'92ll give much more\
[180] to bring about our reconciliation,                                                    \
          a dowry bigger than any man so far\
          has ever handed over with his daughter.\
          I\'92ll give him seven populous cities,\
          Cardamyle, Enope, grassy Hire,                                                                    \
          holy Pherae, fertile Antheia,\
          lovely Aepea, and vine-rich Pedasus,\
          all near the sea, beside sandy Pylos.\
          People living in these places own a lot,\
          many sheep and cattle. They will honour him\
[190] and give him gifts, as if he were a god.                                            \
          Under his laws and sceptre they\'92ll do well.\
          I shall give all this if he will abate\
          his anger. Let him concede. Only Hades\
          is totally relentless and unyielding.\
          That\'92s why of all the gods, he\'92s the one\
          men hate the most. And let him acknowledge\
          my authority, for I\'92m the greater king.                                                         \
          In age I can claim to be his senior.\'94          \
\
          Geranian horseman Nestor then said in reply:          \
\
[200] \'93Mighty son of Atreus, Agamemnon,                                               \
          king of men, the gifts you\'92re offering\
          to lord Achilles can\'92t be criticized.\
          But come, let\'92s send out hand-picked men\
          to go with all speed to Achilles\'92 hut,\
          Peleus\'92 son. And may those I select\
          agree to do it. First, let Phoenix,\
          whom Zeus loves, be leader, then great Ajax,\
          and lord Odysseus. Let herald Odius\
          accompany them, along with Eurybates.                                                     \
[210] Bring some water for our hands. Let\'92s observe                               \
          a holy silence, so we may pray to Zeus,\
          son of Cronos, to take pity on us.\'94          \
\
          Nestor spoke. All present approved of what he\'92d said.\
          Attendants then poured water on their hands.\
          Young men filled mixing bowls with wine up to the brim\
          and passed them round.  With every cup they made libations.\
          Once they\'92d made offerings and drunk their fill of wine,\
          they left the hut of Agamemnon, son of Atreus.\
          Geranian horseman Nestor, looking at each man,\
[220] especially at Odysseus, kept encouraging them                                                 \
          to persuade Achilles, Peleus\'92 excellent son.          \
\
          Along the shore of the tumbling, crashing sea,\
          the envoys made their way, offering up their prayers\
          to world-circling Earthshaker Poseidon to help them\
          more easily convince the great heart of Achilles.\
          They came to the ships and huts of the Myrmidons.\
          There they found Achilles. He was easing his spirit\
          with a tuneful finely decorated lyre.\
          It had a silver cross-piece. He\'92d seized it as a prize\
[230] when he\'92d destroyed the city of E\'ebtion.                                                    \
          With the lyre he was bringing pleasure to his heart,\
          singing about the celebrated deeds of men.\
          Patroclus, his sole companion, sat there facing him,                                          \
          waiting in silence until Achilles finished singing.\
          The envoys approached, lord Odysseus in the lead.\
          They stood in front of him. In astonishment,\
          Achilles got up off his chair and stood up quickly,\
          still holding the lyre. Patroclus did the same,\
          standing up as soon as he saw the embassy.\
          Swift-footed Achilles greeted them and said:          \
\
[240] \'93Welcome.                                         \
          My dear friends have come. I must be needed.\
          Among Achaeans you\'92re the men I love the most,\
          even in my anger.\'94          \
\
          With these words,\
          lord Achilles conducted them inside his hut                                                       \
          and seated them on chairs covered with purple rugs.\
          Moving up close to Patroclus, Achilles said:          \
\
          \'93Son of Menoetius, set out for us\
          a larger wine bowl, and mix stronger wine.\
          Prepare a cup for everyone. These men,\
[250] my closest friends, are under my own roof.\'94                                             \
\
          Achilles spoke. Patroclus obeyed his dear companion.\
          Then in the firelight he set down a large chopping block,\
          placed on it slabs of mutton, goat, and the chine\
          of a plump hog, swimming in fat. Achilles carved,\
          while Automedon held the meat. He sliced up\
          small pieces, then got them ready on the spits.                                                          \
          The son of Menoetius, godlike man, stoked the fire,\
          a huge one. Once the blaze died down and flames subsided,\
          Patroclus spread the glowing embers, laid the spits\
[260] lengthwise on top, setting them in place on stones                               \
          and sprinkling on the sacred salt. When the meat was cooked,\
          he laid it out on platters. Patroclus took the bread,\
          then passed it in fine baskets round the table.\
          Achilles served the meat and sat down by the wall,\
          directly opposite godlike Odysseus.\
          Achilles told Patroclus, his companion,\
          to sacrifice to all the gods. Patroclus threw the offerings                                  \
          into the fire. Then each man helped himself,\
          eating the food prepared and set before him.\
[270] They all ate and drank to their full heart\'92s content.                               \
          Then Ajax gave a nod to Phoenix. Seeing that,\
          lord Odysseus filled up his cup with wine\
          and proposed a toast:          \
\
          \'93Good health, Achilles.\
          We have not had to go without our share\
          of feasts, either in Agamemnon\'92s hut,\
          Atreus\'92 son, or here, for you\'92ve prepared\
          a richly satisfying meal. But now\
          our business is not pleasant banqueting.\
          For we are staring at a great disaster.         \
[280] And, my lord, we are afraid, in a quandary,                                    \
          whether we can save our well-decked ships,                                              \
          or whether they will be destroyed, unless\
          you put on your warlike power once again.\
          For haughty Trojans and their famous allies\
          have camped close to the ships and barricade\
          and lit many fires throughout their army.\
          They claim nothing can prevent them now\
          from attacking our black ships. And Zeus,\
          son of Cronos, has sent them his signal,\
[290] on their right a lightning flash. Hector,                                           \
          exulting hugely in his power,\
          in a terrifying manic frenzy,\
          puts his faith in Zeus, fears neither man nor god.\
          A killing passion now possesses him.\
          He prays for holy dawn to come quickly,                                                    \
          vowing he\'92ll hack apart the high sterns\
          of our ships, burn them in destructive fire,\
          and by those very ships kill the Achaeans\
          driven out in desperation by the smoke.\
[300] I have a dreadful fear deep in my heart                                           \
          that the gods will make good all his boasting,\
          seal our fate, to perish here in Troy,\
          far away from Argos, where horses breed.\
          So rouse yourself, late though it may be,\
          if you\'92ve a mind to save Achaeans\
          from their suffering at this Trojan onslaught.\
          If not, you\'92ll suffer future agonies.\
          You won\'92t find any cure for such despair.                                                    \
          Before that happens, you should think about\
[310] how to help Argives at this evil hour.                                              \
          My friend, that day your father, Peleus,\
          sent you off, away from Phthia,\
          to join Agamemnon, didn\'92t he say this,          \
\
          \'91My son, Athena and Hera will give you\
          power, if they so wish, but you must check\
          that overbearing spirit in your chest.\
          It\'92s better to show good will, to give up\
          malicious quarrelling. Then Achaeans,\
          young and old, will respect you all the more\'92?          \
\
[320] That\'92s what your old father said, advice                                          \
          which you\'92ve forgotten. So even now\
          you should stop, cease this heart-corroding rage.                                     \
          For if you will mitigate your anger,\
          Agamemnon will give you worthy gifts.\
          If you will hear the list, then I\'92ll repeat\
          what Agamemnon has promised to you.\
          All gifts are in his huts\'97seven tripods\
          which fire has not yet touched, ten gold talents,\
          twenty shining cauldrons, twelve strong horses\
[330] whose speed has triumphed, earned them prizes\'97                      \
          a man who\'92s won as much as Agamemnon\
          from racing these sure-footed animals\
          would not be poor or lack possessions\
          or precious gold. Then he will add to this\
          seven women of Lesbos, skilled in crafts,                                                   \
          whom he chose for himself when you captured\
          well-built Lesbos. They surpass all women\
          for their beauty. These he will present to you,\
          with them the one he seized from you, Briseis,\
[340] daughter of Briseus. He\'92ll solemnly swear                                      \
          he never once went up into her bed\
          or had sex with her, as is men\'92s custom,\
          where men and women are concerned.\
          All these things you will receive immediately.\
          If gods grant that we destroy Priam\'92s great city,\
          when we Achaeans allocate the spoils,\
          you may come and load your ship with gold,\
          with bronze, as much as you desire. You may choose                              \
          twenty Trojan women for yourself,\
[350] the loveliest after Argive Helen.                                                       \
          If we get back to the rich land of Argos,\
          you can then become his son-in-law.\
          He\'92ll honour you just as he does Orestes,\
          his son, whom he dearly loves. He\'92s being raised\
          in great prosperity. In his well-built home\
          he has three daughters\'97Chrysothemis,\
          Iphianessa, and Laodice.\
          You can take whichever one you choose\
          back home as your wife to Peleus\'92 house\
[360] and pay no bridal gift. He\'92ll give much more                                            \
          to bring about your reconciliation,\
          a dowry bigger than any man so far\
          has ever handed over with his daughter.\
          He\'92ll give you seven populous cities,\
          Cardamyle, Enope, grassy Hire,\
          holy Pherae, fertile Antheia,\
          lovely Aepea, and vine-rich Pedasus,\
          all near the sea, beside sandy Pylos.\
          People living in these places possess\
[370] many sheep and cattle and will honour you                                   \
          and give you gifts, as if you were a god.\
          Under your laws and sceptre they\'92ll do well.\
          He will give all this, if you will abate\
          your anger. But if your heart still resents                                                    \
          Atreus\'92 son and his gifts, then take pity\
          on all Achaeans, our exhausted soldiers.\
          They will pay you honours like a god.\
          Among them you\'92ll earn enormous glory,\
          for now you might kill Hector, who may well\
[380] approach you\'97he\'92s so obsessed with slaughter,                           \
          he thinks there\'92s not a warrior his equal\
          among Danaans brought here in our ships.\'94          \
\
          Swift-footed Achilles then answered Odysseus:          \
\
          \'93Divinely born son of Laertes,\
          resourceful Odysseus. I must be blunt\
          about what I think, where all this will lead,                                               \
          so you do not sit there and, one by one,\
          try to entice me with sweet promises.\
          I hate like the gates of Hell any man\
[390] who says one thing while thinking something else                       \
          which stays hidden in his mind. So I\'92ll declare\
          what, in my view, it\'92s best for me to say\'97\
          I don\'92t believe that Agamemnon,\
          Atreus\'92 son, or any other Argive\
          will persuade me, for no thanks are given\
          to the man who always fights without rest\
          against the enemy. Whether one fights\
          or stays behind, the shares are still the same\
          Coward and brave man both get equal honour.\
[400] Death treats idle and active men alike.                                                     \
          I\'92ve won nothing for all I\'92ve suffered,\
          battling on, pain in my heart, with my life\
          always under threat. Just as a bird\
          takes scraps of food, whatever she can find,\
          to her fledglings, but herself eats little,\
          so have I lain without sleep many nights,\
          persevered through bloody days of fighting,\
          in battling men in wars about their wives.\
          With ships, I\'92ve seized twelve towns and killed their men.\
[410] On land, in the area of fertile Troy,                                                  \
          I claim eleven more. From all these\
          I took fine treasure, lots of it, brought it                                                     \
          to Agamemnon, Atreus\'92 son\'97I gave it\
          all to him. He stayed back, at the swift ships.\
          He shared very little of what he got,\
          keeping most of it for his own use.\
          He gave prizes to the best of men, the kings,\
          and they hung on to them. From me alone\
          he stole away a prize, a woman I love.\
[420] Let him have his pleasure in bed with her.                                     \
          Why must Argives fight against the Trojans?\
          Why did Atreus\'92 son collect an army\
          and lead it here if not for fair-haired Helen?\
          Are Atreus\'92 sons the only mortal men                                                         \
          who love their wives? Every good and prudent man\
          loves his wife and cares for her, as my heart\
          loved that girl, though captured with my spear.\
          Since he\'92s taken my prize out of my hands\
          and cheated me, let him not try to take\
[430] another thing from me. I know him too well.                                 \
          He\'92ll never persuade me to agree.\
          But, Odysseus, let him rely on you\
          and other kings as well to save his ships\
          from fiery destruction. He has done much\
          without me already. He\'92s built a wall,\
          constructed a large wide ditch around it,                                                    \
          and fixed stakes inside. But for all these things,\
          he\'92s not been able to check the power\
          of man-killing Hector. When I fought\
[440] beside Achaeans, Hector wasn\'92t eager                                             \
          to push the battle far from his own walls.\
          He came out only to the Scaean Gates\
          and to the oak tree. Once he met me there\
          alone. He barely got away from my attack.\
          But now I don\'92t want to fight lord Hector.\
          Tomorrow I\'92ll make holy sacrifice\
          to Zeus, to all the gods, and load my ships,\
          once I\'92ve dragged them down into the sea.\
          You\'92ll see, if you wish, if you\'92re interested,\
[450] tomorrow my ships will be sailing off,                                            \
          on the fish-filled Hellespont, men rowing                                                  \
          with great eagerness. And if Poseidon,\
          famous Earthshaker, gives us fair sailing,\
          in three days I\'92ll reach fertile Phthia.\
          There I own many things I left behind\
          when I made this disastrous trip to Troy.\
          I\'92ll take back from here more gold, red bronze,\
          fair women, and grey iron\'97all I captured.\
          But mighty Agamemnon, Atreus\'92 son,\
[460] in his arrogance, seized back from me                                             \
          the prize which he awarded. Tell him that.\
          Repeat in public everything I say,\
          so other Achaeans will grow angry,                                                              \
          if he, still clothed in shamelessness, hopes\
          at any time to deceive some Argive.\
          Cur that he is, he doesn\'92t dare confront me\
          face to face. I\'92ll discuss no plans with him,\
          no actions. He cheated me, betrayed me.\
          His words will cheat no more. To hell with him!\
[470] Let him march to his death by his own road,                                 \
          for Counsellor Zeus has stolen his wits.\
          I hate his gifts. And he\'92s not worth a damn.\
          Not even if he gave me ten times, no,\
          twenty times more than all he owns right now,\
          or will possess in future, not even                                                                \
          all the wealth amassed in Orchomenus,\
          or Egyptian Thebes, where huge treasures sit\
          piled up in houses\'97that city of gates,\
          one hundred of them, through each can ride\
[480] two hundred men, horses and chariots                                            \
          all together\'97not even if he gave me\
          gifts as numerous as grains of sand\
          beside the sea or particles of dust,\
          not for all that would Agamemnon win\
          my heart, not until he satisfies me\
          in full for all my heartfelt bitter pain.\
          I\'92ll never take as wife any daughter\
          of Agamemnon, son of Atreus,\
          not even if her beauty rivals that\
[490] of golden Aphrodite, or her skill                                                      \
          in crafts equals bright-eyed Athena\'92s.                                                          \
          I will not marry her. Let him select\
          another Achaean, someone like himself,\
          a more prestigious king than me. For me,\
          if the gods keep me safe and I get home,\
          Peleus himself will find me a wife.\
          There are plenty of Achaean women\
          in Hellas and in Phthia\'97daughters of lords,\
          men who govern cities. From them I\'92ll choose\
[500] the one I want to make my cherished wife.                                    \
          My heart has often felt a strong desire\
          to take a woman there as my own wife,\
          someone suitable for marriage, to enjoy\
          the riches which old Peleus has acquired.                                                   \
          Life is worth more to me than all the wealth\
          they say was stored in well-built Ilion\
          some time ago, when they were still at peace,\
          before the sons of Achaea came here,\
          more than all the treasures of the archer,\
[510] Phoebus Apollo, stacked on the stone floor                                   \
          in rocky Pytho. Men can steal cattle,\
          fat sheep, get tripods, herds of sorrel horses.\
          But no man gets his life back, not by theft\
          or plunder, once it has flown out from him,\
          passed beyond the barrier of his teeth.\
          My goddess mother, silver-footed Thetis,                                                  \
          has said two fates may bring about my death.\
          If I remain here, continuing the fight\
          against the Trojans\'92 city, that means\
[520] I won\'92t be going home, but my glory                                               \
          will never die. But if I go back home,\
          my fame will die, although my life will last\
          a long time\'97death will not end it quickly.\
          And so I encourage all the rest of you\
          to sail back home. You\'92ll not attain your goal,\
          steep Ilion, because far-seeing Zeus\
          shields that city with his hand. Its people                                                  \
          have confidence in that. Thus, you should go.\
          Report this message to Achaean leaders\'97\
[530] that\'92s the privilege of senior men\'97                                                \
          their minds must come up with some better plan\
          to save the Achaean fleet and army\
          beside the hollow ships. The one they\'92ve got\
          won\'92t work, since anger still keeps me away.\
          Let Phoenix stay here with me, sleep here,\
          so tomorrow he may join our voyage\
          to his dear native land, if that\'92s his wish.\
          For I will not take him back by force.\'94          \
\
          Achilles spoke. Astounded by his speech, they all sat there,                            \
[540] in silence, stunned by the sheer force of his refusal.                              \
          After a pause, old horseman Phoenix spoke:                                        \
\
          \'93Glorious Achilles, if your mind\
          is really set on going back, if you\
          are totally unwilling to protect\
          our swift ships from destructive fire,\
          because that anger has consumed your heart,\
          how can I remain here, dear lad, alone,\
          away from you? Old horseman Peleus\
          sent me with you, on that day he shipped you\
[550] from Phthia to join Agamemnon.                                                     \
          You were young, knowing nothing about war,                                           \
          which levels men, or about public debates,\
          where men acquire distinction. So Peleus\
          sent me to teach you all these things,\
          so you could speak and carry out great actions.\
          Given all this, dear lad, how can I wish\
          to be alone and separated from you?\
          No, not even if god himself promised\
          to cast off my old age, to make me young,\
[560] the man I was when I first left Hellas,                                             \
          land of beautiful women, running off\
          from my angry father, Amyntor,\
          Ormenus\'92 son. He was incensed with me\
          about his fair-haired mistress. He loved her,\
          thus dishonouring his wife, my mother,                                                      \
          who begged me constantly\'97on her knees\'97\
          to have sex with that mistress, so she\'92d hate\
          my father. I obeyed, did what she asked.\
          My father soon found out what I had done\'97\
[570] he cursed me many times repeatedly,                                             \
          praying to dread Furies that no dear son\
          born from me would ever sit upon his knees.\
          The gods made sure his curses took effect,\
          underworld Zeus and dread Persephone.\
          I planned to murder him with my sharp bronze.\
          Some god checked my anger, putting in my heart\
          what men would say, their great contempt\'97                                              \
          how among all Achaeans I\'92d be called\
          the man who\'92d slaughtered his own father.\
[580] My heart no longer felt the slightest wish                                      \
          to stay in my father\'92s house with him so angry.\
          My friends and relatives who lived around me\
          begged me repeatedly to stay right there.\
          And then they butchered many well-fed sheep,\
          shuffling cattle with crumpled horns, and laid out\
          many hogs, swimming in fat, to be singed\
          in Hephaestus\'92 flames. They drank many jugs\
          of the old man\'92s wine. For nine nights,\
          they kept watch over me throughout the night,                                         \
[590] taking turns as guards. Fires always burned,                                  \
          one underneath the enclosed portico,\
          another in the hallway right outside\
          my bedroom doors. Ten nights later, as night fell,\
          I broke through the tight-closed bedroom doors,\
          went out, and jumped with ease across the wall\
          around the outer court, without being seen\
          by men and women checking up on me.\
          I ran away through all of spacious Hellas,\
          then came a suppliant to fertile Phthia,\
[600] where flocks are bred, to king Peleus.                                             \
          He received me hospitably, loved me,                                                         \
          as a father dearly loves his only son,\
          heir to all his goods. He made me wealthy,\
          assigning me to govern many people.\
          I lived in the borderlands of Phthia,\
          reigning as king over the Dolopes.\
          And I was the one, godlike Achilles,\
          who raised you up to be the man you are.\
          You would refuse to attend a banquet\
[610] with anyone or eat in your own home,                                            \
          unless I set you on my knees, fed you,\
          cut the meat, and held the wine cup for you.\
          Often you soaked the tunic on my chest,                                                    \
          slobbering your wine, a helpless baby.\
          I\'92ve gone through a lot for you, worked hard,\
          bearing in mind that gods had taken care\
          I\'92d never have some children of my own.\
          Godlike Achilles, I made you my son,\
          so that if I ever met disaster,\
[620] you\'92d protect me. So, Achilles, subdue                                            \
          your giant passion. It\'92s not right for you\
          to have an unyielding heart. Gods themselves\
          are flexible, and they have more honour\
          than we possess, more power, too. Men pray\
          when they go wrong or make mistakes,                                                      \
          propitiating gods with offerings,\
          gentle prayers, libations, and sacrifice.\
          Prayers are the daughters of almighty Zeus.\
          Lame, wrinkled, cross-eyed, they try to follow\
[630] behind Folly, who, because she\'92s strong and quick,                      \
          runs far in front of them, appearing\
          all over the world, bringing harm to men.\
          Far behind, Prayers carry on their healing.\
          If a man honours these daughters of Zeus\
          as they come near, they will help him greatly,\
          paying attention to him as he prays.\
          If someone spurns them, rudely rejecting them,                                        \
          they go to Zeus, son of Cronos, begging\
          for Folly to pursue that man, who then\
[640] harms himself and suffers punishment.                                          \
          For that reason, Achilles, you should give\
          Zeus\'92 daughters your respect. They have changed\
          the minds of other men, even great ones.\
          If Agamemnon were not bringing gifts\'97\
          and naming more to come\'97but persisting,\
          inflexibly angry, I wouldn\'92t tell you\
          to cast aside your rage and help the Argives,\
          no matter how painful their distress.\
          But he\'92s giving plenty now, more later.\
[650] He has sent out his greatest warriors,                                                       \
          selected from the whole Achaean army,\
          your finest friends among the Argives.\
          Don\'92t show contempt for what they have to say\
          or insult their coming here. Up to now,\
          your resentment has been justified.\
          But we learn this from previous actions\
          of heroic men\'97when furious anger\
          came over some of them, they were swayed\
          by gifts and by persuasive speeches.\
[660] I recall an old tale from long ago.                                                     \
          Since you are all my friends, I\'92ll tell it.\
          The Curetes and staunch Aetolians             \
          were fighting and killing one another,                                                         \
          around Calydon, with the Aetolians\
          defending Calydon and the Curetes\
          eager to destroy the place in war.\
          Golden-throned Artemis had driven them to fight,\
          in her rage that Oeneus hadn\'92t given her\
          a harvest-offering, first fruits of his orchard.\
[670] Other gods had received their sacrifices,                                        \
          but he\'92d failed to offer anything to her,\
          a daughter of great Zeus. He forgot, or else\
          grew careless, a lapse within his foolish heart.\
          The archer goddess, in her rage, incited\
          a savage white-tusked wild boar against him.\
          This beast from the gods reached Oeneus\'92 orchard                                   \
          and was causing serious damage there,\
          knocking tall plants to the ground, entire trees,\
          including roots and flowering apples.\
[680] Meleager, Oeneus\'92 son, killed the beast.                                         \
          First he gathered huntsmen and hunting dogs\
          from many cities, for a small group\
          could not subdue such an enormous boar.\
          It had killed many men and sent them off\
          to their funeral pyres in agony.\
          Artemis began a war about this beast,\
          that battle between the Curetes\
          and the Aetolians, courageous men\
          fighting for the boar\'92s head and bristly hide.\
[690] So long as war-loving Meleager                                                                  \
          was in the fight, the Curetes did not do well.\
          For all their numbers, they could not hold\
          their ground outside the city walls.\
          But then anger swept through Meleager,\
          just as it forcibly swells up in chests\
          of other men, including wise ones, too.\
          His heart was angry with his dear mother,\
          Althea. So he stayed home with his wife,\
          Cleopatra, the attractive daughter\
[700] of the lady with the lovely ankles,                                                   \
          Maripessa, daughter of Euenus\
          and Ides, strongest of all men then alive.\
          He was the one who took his bow to make\
          a stand against a god, Phoebus Apollo,                                                       \
          fighting for the girl with lovely ankles.                  \
          Cleopatra\'92s father and noble mother\
          at home called her by the name Alcyone.\
          Her mother shared the same fate as that bird,\
          the mournful halcyon, for she cried\
[710] when Apollo, the far shooter, seized her.                                        \
          Beside this Cleopatra Meleager lay,\
          brooding on the rage that pained his heart,\
          infuriated by his mother\'92s curses.\
          In her grief over her brothers\'92 killing,\
          she prayed to the gods, beating fertile earth\
          with her hands over and over, kneeling down,\
          her breasts wet from crying, begging Hades\
          and fearful Persephone to kill her son.*                                                    \
          The night-walking Furies, with their stone hearts,\
[720] listened to her prayers from Erebus.                                                \
          Then around the gates of Calydon\
          the battle din grew loud, war\'92s turmoil.\
          The gates were being demolished. The old men\
          of the Aetolians begged Meleager\
          to come to their assistance. They sent\
          their gods\'92 most important holy priests.\
          They promised him great gifts, telling him\
          he could take for himself, from anywhere\
          on the richest plain of lovely Calydon\
[730] fifty acres of the finest farm land,                                                     \
          half for a vineyard and half for farming,                                                      \
          open fields for ploughing. Oeneus,\
          the old horseman, kept imploring him,\
          standing at the threshold of his high room,\
          beating on the firmly bolted doors,\
          begging his son. His sisters and his mother\
          often entreated him. But he refused.\
          His companions, those most faithful to him,\
          his closest friends of all, added their prayers.\
[740] But they could not overcome those passions                                 \
          in his chest, not until his own room\
          was under fierce attack, once the Curetes\
          had scaled the tower and begun to burn\
          that great city. Then his lovely wife,\
          in her grief, implored Meleager,                                                                   \
          telling him the evils which can overtake\
          men whose town is violently seized\'97\
          how men are butchered and the city burned,\
          with women and children seized by strangers.\
[750] Once he\'92d heard of these disasters, his heart stirred.                    \
          He went outside, put his shining armour\
          around his body\'97and thus averted\
          a disastrous day for the Aetolians,\
          by following his heart. But the Aetolians\
          did not give him the many splendid gifts,\
          although he\'92d saved them from catastrophe.\
          My friend, don\'92t think like Meleager.                                                          \
          Don\'92t let some god make you choose that way.\
          Once the ships catch fire, it will be harder\
[760] to defend them. So accept the gifts.                                                 \
          Achaeans are honouring you like a god.\
          If you return to man-killing battle\
          without the gifts, you\'92ll never get such honour,\
          even though you may push the conflict back.\'94          \
\
          Swift-footed Achilles then said in reply:          \
\
          \'93Phoenix, dear old father, noble lord,\
          I don\'92t need such honours, for I possess\
          honour in the will of Zeus. That will keep\
          me here beside my own hollow ships,\
[770] so long as there is breath within my body,                                                \
          strength in my limbs. But I\'92ll say this to you\'97\
          bear it in mind\'97do not confuse my heart\
          with these laments, these speeches of distress,\
          all serving that heroic son of Atreus.\
          You should not love him, in case I hate you,\
          who are now my friend. You would be noble        \
          to join with me, and so injure the man\
          who injures me. Be equal king with me.\
          Take half my honours. These men report back.\
[780] You stay here. Sleep in your soft bed. At dawn,                             \
          we shall consider whether to go back\
          to our own land, or whether to remain.\'94          \
\
          Achilles spoke. His eyebrows gave a silent signal                                              \
          to Patroclus to set a firm bed out for Phoenix,\
          so the others would quickly think of leaving.\
          But Ajax, godlike son of Telamon, spoke up:          \
\
          \'93Noble son of Laertes, resourceful Odysseus,\
          let\'92s be off. I don\'92t think we\'92ll bring this talk\
          to a successful end, not on this trip.\
[790] We must report this news, though it\'92s not good,                           \
          to the Danaans waiting to receive it.\
          For Achilles has turned his great spirit\
          into something savage in his chest.\
          He\'92s cruel and doesn\'92t care for friendship                                                   \
          of his comrades, how we honoured him\
          above all others there beside the ships.\
          He has no pity. Any man accepts\
          reparations for a murdered son or brother.\
          The man who killed them pays a large amount\
[800] to stay there in his own community.                                               \
          The other man\'92s angry heart and spirit\
          are checked, once he takes the compensation.\
          But with you, gods have put inside your chest\
          unchanging evil passions, and all this\
          over a single girl. Now we are offering\
          seven of the best we have and much more.\
          You should turn your passion into kindness,\
          the hospitality of your own house.                                                               \
          For we are guests here under your own roof,\
[810] chosen from the Argive host. We believe                                        \
          that we, of all Achaeans, are the ones\
          most dear to you, your closest friends,\
          far more so than all the others.\'94          \
\
          Swift-footed Achilles then said in reply:          \
\
          \'93Ajax, noble son of Telamon, your people\'92s leader,\
          everything you say matches what I feel.\
          But my heart chokes with rage when I recall\
          how that son of Atreus behaved towards me\
          with contempt, as if he were dishonouring\
[820] some vagrant. But you\'92d better go, take back                                 \
          this message\'97I shall not concern myself\
          with bloody war until lord Hector,                                                              \
          murderous son of Priam, comes against\
          the huts and sea ships of the Myrmidons,\
          killing Achaean soldiers as he goes,\
          until he starts to burn our ships with fire.\
          I think that Hector will be held in check\
          around my hut, around my own black ship,\
          for all his eagerness to battle on.\'94          \
\
[830] So Achilles spoke. The men each took a goblet                                      \
          with two handles, gave offerings, and went back to the ships,\
          with Odysseus in the lead. Patroclus ordered\
          his companions and the women slaves to set up\
          a sturdy bed without delay for Phoenix.\
          They obeyed his orders and prepared a bed,                                                        \
          with sheepskin fleece and rug and fine linen sheets.\
          The old man lay down, to stay till morning.\
          Achilles slept in a corner of the well-built hut.\
          Beside him lay a woman he\'92d seized from Lesbos,\
[840] fair Diomede, one of Phorbas\'92 daughters.                                                 \
          Patroclus slept opposite Achilles. Beside him\
          lay lovely Iphis, whom Achilles gave him\
          after capturing steep Scyros, Enyeus\'92 city.          \
\
          The others reached the huts of Atreus\'92 son.\
          Achaea\'92s sons stood up and welcomed them with toasts                                  \
          in golden cups, one after another, asking questions.\
          The first to speak was Agamemnon, king of men:          \
\
          \'93So come, tell me, famous Odysseus,\
          great glory of Achaeans, does he wish\
[850] to protect our ships from all-destroying fire,                                 \
          or does he refuse, his mighty spirit\
          still gripped with anger.\'94          \
\
          Lord Odysseus,\
          who had endured much, replied:          \
\
          \'93King of men,\
          mighty Agamemnon, son of Atreus,\
          that man\'92s unwilling to let go his rage.\
          He\'92s full of anger, more so now than ever.\
          He despises you, your gifts, and tells you\
          to sort out for yourself with the Argives                                                     \
          how you may save Achaean ships and men.\
[860] As for him, he made this threat\'97at first light                               \
          of dawn, he\'92ll drag his trim balanced ships\
          down to the sea. He said he would encourage\
          others to sail home, for you\'92ll not attain\
          your goal of lofty Ilion, since Zeus,\
          whose gaze ranges far and wide, holds his hand\
          over Troy, whose people now have confidence.\
          That\'92s what he said. The others who went with me\
          will confirm this for you\'97Ajax and two heralds,\
          both prudent men. Old Phoenix stayed there,                                           \
[870] to go to sleep, as Achilles told him,                                                 \
          so that he may go away with him\
          in his ships back to their dear native land,\
          if he wants, for he won\'92t take him by force.\'94          \
\
          Odysseus spoke. They all were silent and disheartened,\
          especially by the force with which Achilles had refused.\
          Achaea\'92s sons sat a long time speechless, troubled.\
          At last, Diomedes, skilled in war cries, spoke:          \
\
          \'93Mighty Agamemnon, king of men,\
          you should not have begged noble Peleus\'92 son,\
[880] offering countless gifts. At the best of times,                                 \
          he\'92s a proud man Now you\'92ve encouraged him                                          \
          to be prouder still. Let\'92s leave him alone,\
          whether he goes or stays. For he\'92ll fight\
          when the spirit in his chest moves him,\
          or when god drives him to it. But come on,\
          let\'92s all follow what I now propose.\
          We\'92ve had our fill of food and wine. So now,\
          you should get some sleep, for strength and stamina.\
          When fair rosy-fingered Dawn appears,\
[890] you should range your army\'97men and horses\'97                          \
          before the ships, then rouse their spirits,\
          with you fighting at the front in person.\'94          \
\
          All the kings applauded horse-taming Diomedes.                                              \
          They poured libations. Then each man went to his hut,\
          where he lay down and stretched out to take the gift of sleep.}