{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf460
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural\qc

\f0\fs24 \cf0 Book Twelve\
The Fight at the Barricade\
          \

\i [The battle continues at the wall, with Achaeans hemmed in; Polydamas advises Hector to leave the chariots behind; Trojans organize themselves into five companies for the assault; two Lapith spearmen guard the Achaean gate; Trojans receive a bad omen; Polydamas advises Hector not to the attack the wall; Sarpedon's speech to Glaucus about their warrior code; Sarpedon assaults the wall; Menestheus asks for help from Ajax and Teucer; Ajax responds; Glaucus is wounded; Hector demolishes the doors in the gate; the Trojans breach the wall; Achaeans retreat to their ships]
\i0 \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural
\cf0           \
          And so, as Patroclus, Menoetius\'92 fine son, looked after\
          wounded Eurypylus in his hut, Trojans and Achaeans\
          kept fighting on in clusters. The Danaan ditch\
          and the high broad wall weren\'92t going to hold out long.                      \
          They\'92d built the wall, then dug the ditch around it,\
          to protect the ships and guard the ample plunder\
          stored inside. But they\'92d built it without sanction\
          from immortal gods\'97they\'92d made no splendid offering,\
          no sacrifices to the gods, asking them to keep\
  [10] their swift ships safe, so the wall soon fell apart.                                     \
          As long as Hector lived and Achilles\'92 anger                                                          \
          did not relent and Priam\'92s city wasn\'92t captured,\
          the huge Achaean wall remained intact.\
          But after so many of the finest Trojans died,\
          many Achaeans, too, though many did survive,\
          in the war\'92s tenth year, Priam\'92s city was destroyed.\
          When Achaeans sailed back to their dear native land,\
          then Poseidon and Apollo planned to erase that wall,\
          by stirring up the raging power of all rivers\
  [20] flowing from Mount Ida to the sea\'97Rhesus,                                           \
          Heptaporus, Caresus, Rhodius, Granicus,                                                              \
          Aesepus, the sacred Scamander and Simoeis,\
          where many ox-hide shields and helmets had fallen\
          in the dust, along with a race of people half-divine.\
          Phoebus Apollo merged the mouths of all these rivers,\
          then for nine days drove the flood against the rampart.\
          Zeus brought constant rain to wash the wall away\
          into the sea more quickly. And Poseidon, too,\
          the Earthshaker himself, holding his trident,\
  [30] led the work, his waves eroding all foundations,                                     \
          wood and stone Achaeans had worked so hard to set there.\
          He smoothed the shores of the fast-flowing Hellespont,                                   \
          covering huge beaches once again with sand. The wall gone,\
          he changed the rivers, so they flowed on as before,\
          their lovely waters in their customary channels.\
          All this Apollo and Poseidon would do later on.\
          \
          But then the din of war raged round the sturdy wall.\
          The battered timbers on the tower rattled.\
          Argives, broken by Zeus\'92 whip, were all hemmed in\
  [40] beside their hollow ships, held back by fear of Hector,                          \
          whose powerful presence scared them, for, as before,\
          he battled like a whirlwind. Just as some wild boar                                            \
          or lion faced with dogs and huntsmen keeps turning,\
          confident of his strength, and men form in a line,\
          preparing to go against the beast, hurling spears\
          in volleys from their hands\'97still it doesn\'92t tremble,\
          show any fear in its brave heart, but its courage\
          kills the beast\'97repeatedly it whirls itself around,\
          threatening the ranks of men\'97that\'92s how Hector then\
  [50] moved through the troops, urging men to attack the ditch                   \
          and charge across it. But his swift-footed horses balked,                                   \
          standing at the very edge, neighing loudly,\
          terrified because the trench was wide to cross.\
          They couldn\'92t easily jump over it or get through.\
          On both sides there were steep banks along its length,\
          with many large sharp stakes driven in the upper edge,\
          set there by Achaea\'92s sons as a protection\
          against their enemies. There was no easy way\
          horses pulling chariots with wheels could move across.\
  [60] Even men on foot weren\'92t confident about it.                                          \
          Then Polydamas, coming up beside bold Hector, said:                                      \
          \
          \'93Hector, you other leaders, you allies,\
          it\'92s foolish to think of driving our swift horses\
          through this trench. It\'92s difficult to get across,\
          with those sharpened stakes projecting from it,\
          right by the Achaean wall. There\'92s no way\
          any charioteer could get down and fight.\
          There\'92s not much room. I think we\'92d get badly hurt.\
          If high-thundering Zeus intends to help the Trojans\
  [70] and harm Achaeans, wipe them out completely,                           \
          I\'92d prefer that happened right away,\
          so Achaeans all die here, far from Argos,                                                     \
          unremembered. But if they turn us back,\
          drive us from the ships, and trap us in the trench,\
          and if Achaeans then reorganize,\
          I don\'92t think any of us will get back\
          to our city with the news. But come,\
          let\'92s all agree to what I now propose\'97\
          attendants should hold the horses at the ditch.\
  [8] 0We\'92ll arm ourselves with heavy weapons,                                       \
          then all follow Hector bunched up tightly.\
          Achaeans will not push us back, if it\'92s true\
          they\'92re already headed for destruction.\'94\
          \
          What Polydamas had just proposed pleased Hector.                                          \
          With his weapons, he jumped from his chariot to the ground.\
          The other Trojans did not hesitate. Seeing him do that,\
          they leapt quickly from their chariots and left them there.\
          Each man told his charioteer to keep the horses\
          in good order by the ditch. The men broke up in groups\
  [90] and organized themselves to form five companies,                                \
          with each one following its own leadership.\
          Some went with Hector and worthy Polydamas.\
          They were the best and most numerous, especially keen\
          to breach the wall and fight on at the hollow ships.                                           \
          Cebriones went with them as third commander.\
          Paris led the second group, along with Agenor\
          and Alcathous. Helenus and godlike De\'efphobus,\
          two sons of Priam, led the third contingent,\
          with a third commander, warlike Asius,\
[100] son of Hyrtacus, whose huge horses had carried him                              \
          all the way from Arisbe by the Selle\'efs river.\
          The fourth group of warriors was headed by Aeneas,\
          Anchises\'92 brave son, with Archelochus\
          and Acamas, two sons of Antenor, well skilled                                                    \
          in all the elements of war. The famous allies\
          Sarpedon led. He\'92d chosen to command with him\
          Glaucus and warlike Asteropaeus, for they seemed\
          clearly the best of all the others, after himself,\
          for among them all he was pre-eminent.\
[110] These men linked themselves with sturdy bull\'92s hide shields,               \
          then in their eagerness made straight for the Danaans.\
          They thought no one could stop them, as they charged the ships.\
          \
          Other Trojans and their famous allies followed\
          what excellent Polydamas had said to them,\
          but Asius, son of Hyrtacus, leader of men,                                                            \
          did not want to leave his horses or their driver,\
          the attendant charioteer. He brought them with him\
          as he went for the ships. The fool! He would not escape\
          his grim fate and come back from the ships to windy Troy,\
[120] proudly boasting of his chariot and horses.                                              \
          Before that happened an unwelcome fate took him\
          on the spear of Deucalion\'92s proud son, Idomeneus.\
          Asius moved off to the left of the line of ships,\
          where Achaeans used to pass with horse and chariot\
          when returning from the plain. That\'92s where he drove\
          his chariot and team. He found the gates unbarred\'97                                        \
          men had drawn the long bolt and were holding them ajar,\
          just in case they might save one of their companions\
          escaping from the battle to the ships. At those gates\
[130] Asius firmly aimed his horses. His men followed,                                   \
          shouting loudly. They thought Achaeans could hold out\
          no longer, that they\'92d be assaulting the black ships.\
          How wrong they were! For at the gates they found two men,\
          two of the finest\'97proud-hearted sons of Lapith spearmen.\
          One was powerful Polypoetes, son of Peirithous,\
          the other Leonteus, a warrior like man-killing Ares.                                          \
          These two made their stand before the lofty gate,\
          like two high-topped mountain oak trees which defy\
          wind and rain each and every day, anchored there\
[140] by huge extensive roots\'97just like that, these two men,                        \
          trusting the power in their arms, held their position,\
          as great Asius approached. They did not run off.\
          Holding bull\'92s hide shields up high, with loud shouts,\
          Asius\'92 men came straight for the well-built wall,\
          behind lord Asius, Iamenus, Orestes,\
          Adamas, Asius\'92 son, Tho\'f6n, and Oenomaus.                                                        \
          \
          Up to now, the two Lapiths had been urging\
          well-armed Achaeans from inside the rampart\
          to defend their ships. But when they noticed Trojans\
[150] charging the wall and Danaans running off and shouting,                     \
          the two men hurried out to fight beyond the gates.\
          Like wild mountain boars taking on a confused mob\
          of men and dogs attacking them\'97the beasts charge sideways,\
          shattering trees around them, ripping out the roots,\
          gnashing their teeth noisily, till someone\
          hits them with his spear and takes away their lives\'97                                        \
          that\'92s how the shining bronze sounded on these two,\
          as they moved out against the flying weapons.\
          But they fought bravely, relying on their strength\
[160] and on those troops standing on the wall above them,                          \
          who kept throwing rocks down from the sturdy tower,\
          defending themselves, their huts, their well-built ships.\
          Stones fell to earth like snowflakes which some strong wind\
          pushing shadowy clouds drives downward in a storm,\
          so they strike the fertile earth, that\'92s how thick and fast\
          flying weapons rained down then from Trojans and Achaeans.                         \
          Helmets and bossed shields rang out as they were hit\
          with rocks the size of millstones. Then Asius,\
          son of Hyrtacus, groaned in vexation, struck his thigh,\
          and cried out:\
          \
[170] \'93Father Zeus, how you love to lie!                                         \
          I didn\'92t think these warrior Achaeans\
          could withstand the force of our all-powerful hands.\
          But they\'92re like yellow-banded wasps or bees\
          who\'92ve made their home by some rough road\
          and won\'92t leave their hollow house, but stay there,\
          guarding their offspring from the hunting men.                                         \
          That\'92s how these men refuse to yield the gate,\
          though there\'92s just two of them, until they kill us\
          or are killed themselves.\'94      \
          \
          Asius complained,\
[180] but his words did not win over Zeus\'92 mind,                                              \
          for in his heart he wished to give Hector glory.\
          \
          Other troops were battling on at other gates.\
          It would be hard for me to report all these events,\
          even if I were a god. For by that stone wall\
          blazing fires broke out everywhere. Though in distress,\
          Achaeans had no choice but to defend their ships\'97\
          gods helping Danaans in the fight were sad at heart.                                          \
          \
          The two Lapiths now began to kill in earnest.\
          Powerful Polypoetes, son of Peirithous,\
[190] with his spear struck Damasus through his cheek piece.                        \
          The bronze helmet didn\'92t stop the spear\'97its bronze point\
          tore straight through his skull, splattering his brains\
          all through his helmet. That checked his fighting fury.\
          Then he slaughtered Pylon, as well as Ormenus.\
          With his spear, Leonteus, Ares\'92 assistant, hit\
          Hippomachus, son of Antimachus, in his belt.\
          Then, pulling out his sharp sword from its scabbard,                                          \
          he charged the Trojan mass, struck Antiphates,\
          hitting him at close range first. So he lay there,\
[200] on his back, motionless. Leonteus then struck down                              \
          in quick succession Menon, Iamenus, and Orestes\'97\
          all these lay prone there, on the all-nourishing earth.\
          \
          While the two Lapiths were stripping shining armour\
          from the dead, young troops with Polydamas and Hector,\
          the most numerous and bravest of the men,\
          the ones most keen to breach the wall and burn the ships,\
          still stood along the ditch in some perplexity.\
          For as they\'92d assembled, eager to cross the trench,                                             \
          a bird had gone above them, a high-flying eagle,\
[210] moving past the left flank of the troops, gripping                                   \
          in its talons a huge blood-red snake, still alive,\
          still struggling. It hadn\'92t lost its will to fight.\
          Doubling up, it struck the bird that clutched it\
          beside the neck. The eagle, stung with pain,\
          let the snake fall down onto the ground, dropping it\
          right in the middle of the crowd. Then with a cry,\
          it flew off downwind. Seeing that writhing snake,\
          lying there in their midst, Trojans shuddered. It was a sign,\
          a powerful omen, from aegis-bearing Zeus.\
[220] Polydamas then approached bold Hector and spoke out:                                 \
          \
          \'93Hector, you\'92re always taking me to task,\
          though I give good advice in our assemblies.\
          For you maintain it\'92s not appropriate\
          that someone else speak out against you,\
          either in a council meeting or in war,\
          for he should always back your leadership.\
          But now I\'92m going to say what seems to me\
          the best course we should take. Let\'92s not advance\
          to fight Danaans by their ships. In my view,\
[230] this is how all this will end. If that omen                                        \
          was sent to Trojans keen to cross the ditch,\
          a high-flying eagle on our army\'92s left\
          holding in its talons a blood-red snake,                                                       \
          still living, which it let drop before it reached\
          its nest, thus failing in its purpose,\
          to bring that snake back for its offspring,\
          then, like that bird, if we, with our great strength,\
          breach the gates and the Achaean wall,\
          and if Achaeans then retreat, we\'92ll come back\
[240] from the ships by this same route in disarray,                                \
          leaving behind many Trojans slaughtered\
          by Achaean bronze, as they defend their ships.\
          That\'92s how a prophet would interpret this,\
          someone who in his heart knew the truth of signs\
          and in whom the people placed their trust.\'94\
          \
          Hector with his gleaming helmet scowled and said:                                           \
          \
          \'93Polydamas, I don\'92t like what you\'92ve just said.\
          You know how to offer better comments.\
          But if you\'92re serious in what you say,\
[250] the gods themselves must have destroyed your wits.                    \
          You\'92re telling me to set aside the plans\
          of thunder-loving Zeus, what he promised,\
          what he himself agreed to. You tell me\
          to put my faith in long-winged birds. I don\'92t care,\
          or even notice, whether they fly off\
          to the right, towards Dawn\'92s rising sun,\
          or to the left, towards the evening gloom.                                                  \
          Let\'92s put our trust in great Zeus\'92 counsel,\
          for he rules all mortals, all immortals.\
[260] One omen is best\'97fight for your country.                                      \
          Why are you afraid of war, of battle?\
          Even if the others are all slaughtered\
          by Achaean ships, you need have no fear\
          that you\'92ll be killed. Your heart is neither brave\
          nor warlike. But if you hold back from war,\
          or with your words convince some other man\
          to turn away from battle, then you\'92ll die,\
          struck by my spear.\'94                                                                                                                                                \
          \
          Hector finished speaking.\
          Then he led his troops away. They followed him,\
[270] making a huge noise. Thunder-loving Zeus then sent                             \
          gusting storm winds down from Ida, driving dust\
          straight at the ships, to disorient Achaeans\
          and give glory to Hector and the Trojans.\
          Trusting Zeus\'92 sign and their own power, they tried\
          to force the great Achaean wall, dragging down\
          the tower\'92s supporting beams, smashing parapets,\
          prying up projecting columns Achaeans had first put                                         \
          into the earth to shore up their wall\'92s foundations.\
          They dragged these back, hoping to undermine the wall.\
[280] But even now Danaans did not back away.                                              \
          They repaired the parapets with leather hides,\
          then hurled out weapons from there across the rampart\
          at the attacking Trojans.\
          \
          The two Ajaxes\
          moved back and forth along the wall, urging men on,\
          firing up the fighting spirit in Achaeans.\
          To some men they called out words of encouragement.\
          Others, the ones they saw clearly moving off,\
          back from the fight, they taunted with abuse.\
          \
          \'93Friends, whether you\'92re an Achaean leader,\
[290] or average, or one of the worst\'97for men                                                  \
          are not all equal when it comes to battle\'97\
          there\'92s enough work here for everyone,\
          as you yourselves well know. So let no one here\
          turn back towards the ships, now you\'92ve heard\
          from your commander. Keep pushing forward,\
          keep shouting to each other, so that Zeus,\
          Olympian lord of lightning, may grant\
          we beat off this attack, repel the Trojans,\
          and drive them to their city.\'94\
          \
          Shouting words like these,\
[300] the Ajaxes incited the Achaeans to fight on.                                            \
          As snowflakes on a winter\'92s day fall thick and fast,\
          when Counsellor Zeus begins to snow, to demonstrate                                              \
          to men his weapons\'97first he calms the winds,\
          then snows steadily, till he\'92s completely covered\
          high mountain peaks, jutting headlands, grassy meadows,\
          fertile farms of men, shedding snow on harbours,\
          inlets of the blue-grey sea, where waves roll in\
          to push back snow, while, from above, all the rest\
          is covered over, when Zeus storms with heavy snow\'97\
[310] that\'92s how thick the stones fell then on both sides,                                 \
          some thrown on Trojans, some from Trojans on Achaeans.\
          The noise reverberated all along the wall.\
          \
          At that point, glorious Hector and the Trojans                                                    \
          would not have crashed the gates or long bolts in the wall,\
          if Counsellor Zeus had not stirred his son Sarpedon\
          against Achaeans, like a lion going at short-horn cattle.\
          Sarpedon held his round shield in front of him,\
          forged by a smith of beautifully hammered bronze,\
          the inside formed of leather stitched in layers,\
[320] held in place with golden wires encircling the rim.                                \
          Holding this shield before him, brandishing two spears,\
          he hurried forward like a mountain lion\
          long ravenous for meat, whose bold spirit pushes him                                       \
          to go even into the protected sheep fold\
          to attack the flock, and even if he comes across\
          herdsmen with dogs and spears guarding sheep inside,\
          he won\'92t leave that fold without making an attempt,\
          so he springs on one, seizes it, or is hit himself\
          in the first rush, by a spear from some swift hand\'97\
[330] that\'92s how godlike Sarpedon\'92s spirit drove him then                              \
          to assault the wall, break down the parapets.\
          He called to Glaucus, Hippolochus\'92 son:\
          \
          \'93Glaucus,\
          why are we two awarded special honours,                                                    \
          with pride of place, the finest cuts of meat,\
          our wine cups always full in Lycia,\
          where all our people look on us as gods?\
          Why do we possess so much fine property,\
          by the river Xanthus, beside its banks,\
          rich vineyards and wheat-bearing ploughland?\
[340] It\'92s so we\'92ll stand in the Lycian front ranks                                      \
          and meet head on the blazing fires of battle,\
          so then some well-armed Lycian will say,\
          \
          \'91They\'92re not unworthy, those men who rule Lycia,\
          those kings of ours. It\'92s true they eat plump sheep\
          and drink the best sweet wines\'97but they are strong,                            \
          fine men, who fight in Lycians\'92 front ranks.\'92\
          \
          Ah my friend, if we could escape this war,\
          and live forever, without growing old,\
          if we were ageless, then I\'92d not fight on\
[350] in the foremost ranks, nor would I send you                                   \
          to those wars where men win glory. But now,\
          a thousand shapes of fatal death confront us,\
          which no mortal man can flee from or avoid.\
          So let\'92s go forward, to give the glory\
          to another man or win it for ourselves.\'94\
          \
          Sarpedon spoke. Without making any move\
          Glaucus agreed. They marched on straight ahead,                                              \
          leading their large company of Lycians.\
          Seeing their advance, Menestheus, son of Peteos,\
[360] shuddered, for they were aiming at his part of the wall,                        \
          bringing destruction with them. He looked around\
          at the Achaean tower, hoping he might see\
          some leader to protect his comrades from disaster.\
          He saw both Ajaxes, so keen for war, standing there.\
          Nearby was Teucer, who\'92d just come from his huts.\
          But there was no way they\'92d hear him if he shouted\'97\
          the noise was too intense. The din of smashed-in shields,\
          gates, and horsehair helmets\'97that sound reached heaven.\
          The doors were now all barred. Men stood outside them,                                         \
[370] trying to knock them down by force to pass on through.                       \
          Menestheus quickly sent herald Tho\'f6tes to Ajax:\
          \
          \'93Noble Tho\'f6tes, run and call Ajax\'97\
          or rather both of them, if that\'92s possible\'97\
          that would be the best solution. Here we face\
          complete destruction any minute now.\
          Lycian leaders are pressing us so hard,\
          the ones who previously in bloody fights\
          have demonstrated their ferocity.\
          But if they\'92re having trouble where they are,\
[380] with fights breaking out, let mighty Ajax,                                       \
          son of Telamon, come by himself\'97\
          and with him that expert archer Teucer.\'94                                                    \
          \
          Menestheus finished. Tho\'f6tes heard him and obeyed.\
          He ran along the bronze-clad Achaeans\'92 barricade,\
          then came and, standing by both Ajaxes, spoke up at once:\
          \
          \'93You Ajaxes, leaders of bronze-armed Achaeans,\
          the son of Peteos, raised by gods, is calling you\
          to go to him and help relieve the battle strain,\
          if only for a while. And he\'92d prefer\
[390] you both come. That would be the best solution.                          \
          There they face immediate destruction.\
          Lycian leaders are pressing them so hard,\
          the ones who previously in bloody fights\
          have demonstrated their ferocity.                                                                \
          But if you\'92re having trouble where you are,\
          with fights erupting, then let mighty Ajax,\
          son of Telamon, come by himself\'97\
          and with him that expert archer Teucer.\'94\
          \
          Tho\'f6tes finished. Great Telamonian Ajax then agreed.\
[400] At once he spoke winged words to O\'eflean Ajax:                                      \
          \
          \'93Ajax, you and powerful Lycomedes,\
          you both stay here, stand firm. Rouse Danaans\
          to battle hard. I\'92ll go over there,\
          deal with that fight, and come back quickly,\
          once I\'92ve helped them out as best I can.\'94\
          \
          That said, Telamonian Ajax left. With him                                                          \
          went Teucer, his brother, both from the same father.\
          Pandion also went, carrying Teucer\'92s curving bow.\
          Moving along the wall the three men reached the place\
[410] where stout-hearted Menestheus stood. Here they found                     \
          soldiers hard pressed in the fight. The Lycians,\
          led on by powerful commanders, their kings,\
          were climbing up the parapets like some black whirlwind.\
          Ajax and the others jumped right into the fight.\
          The noise grew more intense.\
          \
          Ajax, son of Telamon,\
          was the first to kill a man, brave Epicles,\
          companion of Sarpedon. Ajax hit him\
          with a massive jagged rock lying inside the wall,                                                \
          near the top. No man now alive could heft that stone\
[420] in his two hands, not even someone young and strong,                          \
          but Ajax raised it high, then hurled it, smashing\
          the man\'92s four-ridged helmet and completely crushing\
          his entire skull. Epicles fell, like a diver,\
          from that high tower, and his spirit left his bones.\
          Teucer struck mighty Glaucus, son of Hippolochus,\
          with an arrow shot from high up on the wall,\
          as Glaucus was moving up. He hit him on the arm,\
          on a part he saw exposed. That stopped Glaucus\'92 charge.\
          He climbed back down the wall, but stealthily,                                                 \
[430] so no Achaean man could see that he\'92d been hit                                     \
          and boast aloud about it. Sarpedon was upset\
          at Glaucus\'92 departure, when he noticed it,\
          but he did not neglect to keep up the attack.\
          He lunged at Alcmaon, Thestor\'92s son, speared him well,\
          then yanked his spear back, which pulled Alcmaon with it.\
          He fell forward\'97his finely decorated armour,\
          all of bronze, echoed as he crashed onto the ground.\
          With his strong hands, Sarpedon grabbed the parapet and pulled.\
          The whole construction fell apart, breaching the wall,\
[440] creating a passage through for many men.                                               \
          \
          Ajax and Teucer now advanced together                                                              \
          to attack Sarpedon. Teucer hit him with an arrow\
          on the gleaming strap around his chest which held\
          his protective shield. But Zeus defended his own son\
          from deadly fates to make sure he\'92d not be destroyed\
          by the ships\'92 sterns. Ajax then jumped in, striking his shield.\
          The point did not pass through, but its momentum\
          knocked Sarpedon back in the middle of his charge.\
          Sarpedon withdrew a little from the parapet,\
[450] but did not retreat completely, for his heart                                            \
          was set on seizing glory. So he called out,\
          rallying his godlike Lycians:\
          \
          \'93You Lycians,\
          Why is your fighting spirit lessening?\
          It\'92s hard for me, although I\'92m powerful,                                                       \
          to breach this wall alone and carve a pathway\
          to the ships. So come, battle on with me.\
          The more men there are, the better the work done.\'94\
          \
          Sarpedon called. Fearing the censure of their leader,\
          troops made a heavy push around their counsellor king.\
[460] On the other side, the Argives reinforced their ranks                             \
          inside the wall. For both sides a major fight ensued.\
          Lycians, though strong, could not break the Danaan wall\
          and cut their way through to the ships. Danaan spearmen\
          could not push the Lycians back, repel them from the wall,                             \
          now they\'92d reached it. As two men with measuring rods\
          quarrel over survey markers in a common field,\
          striving for a fair division in some narrow place,\
          that\'92s how the parapet kept these troops apart.\
          High on the wall they hacked each other\'92s armour\'97\
[470] leather bucklers and large round shields across their chests,                 \
          quivering targets. Many men were wounded,\
          flesh slashed with pitiless bronze, those who turned aside\
          and left their backs exposed while fighting and those\
          hit right through their shields. Everywhere along the wall,\
          along the parapet, men\'92s blood was spattered                                                     \
          from Trojans and Achaeans. But even so,\
          Trojans could not dislodge Achaeans from the wall.\
          Just as an industrious and honest woman\
          holds her scales, a weight on one side, wool on the other,\
[480] until they balance, so she can glean a pittance                                        \
          for her children, that\'92s how evenly the battle raged,\
          until Zeus gave glory above all other men\
          to Hector, son of Priam, who was the first man\
          to jump inside that wall of the Achaeans.\
          He raised a resounding yell, crying to his Trojans:\
          \
          \'93Drive forward, you horse-taming Trojans.                                                 \
          Breach that Argive wall. Then burn the ships\
          with a huge fire.\'94\
          \
          With these words, he drove them on.\
          Their ears all caught his call. Hurling themselves at the wall\
[490] in a dense mass, gripping sharp spears, they began to climb.                \
          Hector picked up a rock lying before the gates,\
          thick at its base but tapering sharply on the top.\
          Two of the best working men now living\
          could not lever that stone out of the ground easily\
          into their cart, but Hector carried it with ease alone.\
          Crooked-minded Cronos\'92 son made it light for him.                                           \
          Just as a shepherd has no trouble carrying\
          a ram\'92s fleece in one hand, hardly noticing the weight,\
          so Hector lifted up that rock, then carried it\
[500] straight to the doors guarding the strongly fitted gates,                        \
          high double doors with two cross pieces holding them inside\
          secured with a single bolt. Hector moved up closer,\
          planted himself before the doors, his legs wide apart\
          to throw with greater force, then hurled that rock\
          right at the centre of the doors. He smashed both hinges.                                 \
          The stone\'92s momentum took it clear through the doors.\
          The gates groaned loudly. The bolts were sheared right off.\
          The impact of that boulder shattered all the planks.\
          Glorious Hector, his face like night\'92s swift darkness,\
[510] leapt inside. The bronze which covered his whole body                        \
          was a terrifying glitter. In his hand he held two spears.\
          Once he\'92d jumped inside the gates, no one moving out\
          to stop him could hold him back, except the gods.\
          From his eyes fire blazed. Wheeling through the throng,\
          he shouted to his Trojans to climb the wall.\
          His men responded to his call. Some scaled the wall,\
          others came pouring through the hole made in the gates.\
          Danaans were driven back among their hollow ships                                         \
          in a rout, and the noisy tumult never stopped.\
          \
}