{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf460
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural\qc

\f0\fs24 \cf0 Book Thirteen\
The Trojans Attack the Ships          \

\i \
[Zeus turns away from the battle; Poseidon secretly helps the Achaeans, talks to the two Ajaxes and other warriors; Hector keeps advancing until stopped by close-packed Achaeans; Poseidon talks with Idomeneus; Idomeneus and Meriones meet at the huts, then return to battle; Idomeneus' exploits in the fight; Aeneas moves against him; Menelaus on the battle field; Polydamas gives advice to Hector; Hector insults Paris; Ajax and Hector exchange boasts; the armies resume the fight.]    \

\i0 \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural
\cf0           Thus Zeus brought Hector and the Trojans to the ships.\
          Then he left the soldiers there to carry on their strife,\
          their wretched endless war. He turned his shining gaze\
          away from them, looking far off into the distance,\
          at the land of Thracian horsemen, Mysians,\
          men who fight hand to hand, proud Hippemolgi,\
          who drink mare\'92s milk, to the most righteous men of all,\
          the Abii. Zeus no longer turned his radiant eyes\
          toward Troy, for in his heart he did not believe\
  [10] a single one of the immortal gods would move                                    \
          to give assistance to the Trojans or Danaans.             \
          \
          But mighty Earthshaker Poseidon was keeping watch.                                   \
          High on the tallest crest of wooded Samothrace\
          he sat looking down upon the war going on.\
          From that point, Mount Ida was clearly visible,\
          Priam\'92s city, too, and the Achaean ships.\
          He\'92d come up from the sea and seated himself there,\
          pitying Achaeans, as Trojans beat them back,\
          and nursing a powerful anger against Zeus.\
  [20] Poseidon came down quickly from that rocky peak,                           \
          moving swiftly on his feet. Mountain peaks and woods\
          trembled under Poseidon\'92s immortal stride.\
          He took three paces\'97with the fourth he reached his goal,                             \
          Aegae, where his famous palace had been built\
          of eternal gold and marble deep within the sea.\
          Going inside, he harnessed to his chariot\
          swift bronze-hooved horses with flowing golden manes.\
          Dressed in gold, he took his well-made golden whip,\
          climbed in the chariot, then set off across the waves.\
  [30] From the depths, sea creatures played around him everywhere,          \
          acknowledging their king. The joyful ocean parted.\
          He sped on quickly, keeping the bronze axle dry.                                            \
          The prancing horses carried him to the Achaean ships.\
          \
          Half-way between Tenedos and rocky Imbros,\
          a wide cavern sits deep within the sea. In that spot,\
          Earthshaker Poseidon reined in his horses,\
          freed them from the chariot, and threw down ambrosia,\
          food for them to eat. Around their feet he placed\
          golden hobbles which they could not slip or break,\
  [40] so they\'92d remain secure there till their lord\'92s return.                            \
          Then Poseidon moved on to the Achaean camp.\
          \
          At that point, Trojans, like some fire or windstorm,\
          marched behind Hector, son of Priam, in a mass,                                            \
          shouting and screaming with excitement, hoping\
          to seize Achaean ships and kill the best men there.\
          But Poseidon, who encircles and shakes the earth,\
          roused the Argives, once he\'92d moved up from the sea.\
          Taking on the shape and tireless voice of Calchas,\
          he first spoke to the Ajaxes, both keen to fight.\
          \
  [50] \'93You Ajaxes, you must save Achaean troops.                                \
          Think of your fighting power, not cold flight.\
          In other places, I don\'92t fear the Trojans,\
          whose powerful arms have brought hordes of them                               \
          across our wall. For well-armed Achaeans\
          will check them all. But I fear them here,\
          where we may experience disaster,\
          because of Hector, who leads their charge.\
          He\'92s like a man possessed, a blazing fire,\
          as if he were a son of mighty Zeus.\
  [60] But perhaps some god will inspire the hearts                             \
          in both your chests, so you two can stand firm.\
          You could get other men to do the same.\
          Hector may be keen, but you could push him\
          back from our swift ships, even if Zeus himself\
          is driving him ahead.\'94\
          \
          Poseidon finished speaking.\
          Then, the shaker and encircler of the earth\
          touched both men with his staff, infusing them                                               \
          with power, strengthening their legs and upper arms.\
          Then Poseidon left. Just as a swift-winged hawk\
  [70] takes off while hovering above some high sheer rock,                         \
          swooping down over the plain to hunt another bird\'97\
          that how Earthshaker Poseidon went off then.\
          Swift Ajax, son of O\'efleus, was the first\
          to recognize the god. At once he spoke to Ajax,\
          son of Telamon:\
          \
          \'93Ajax, one of the gods\
          dwelling on Olympus, in a prophet\'92s shape,\
          tells us both to fight on by the ships.\
          For that man was no prophet Calchas,                                                   \
          who reads our omens. It was easy for me,\
  [80] as he went away, to see that from the back                                \
          by the markings on his feet and legs.\
          Besides, it\'92s easy to recognize the gods.\
          So now the spirit here in my own chest\
          is even keener than before to fight.\
          My upper arms have lots of energy.\
          I feel it also in my lower limbs.\'94\
          \
          Telamonian Ajax then answered O\'eflean Ajax:\
          \
           \'93I\'92m ready to wrap my conquering hands\
          around my spear. My fighting power grows.\
  [90] My feet can now move fast. So I\'92m eager                                   \
          to meet Hector, son of Priam, one on one\'97\
          the man whose fury so desires this fight.\'94                                              \
          \
          As the two Ajaxes talked like this to one another,\
          relishing the warlike spirit the god had put\
          into their hearts, the Encircler of the Earth\
          was encouraging Achaeans at the rear,\
          those whose spirits were recovering by the swift ships,\
          their limbs exhausted from their anguishing ordeals,\
          their hearts weighed down with sorrow at the sight\
[100] of Trojan soldiers coming over their great wall.                                   \
          When they saw that, their eyes shed tears\'97they thought\
          they\'92d not escape destruction. Earthshaker Poseidon\
          moved round with ease, bringing strength into the ranks.                               \
          He moved first to encourage Teucer and Le\'eftus,\
          then brave Peneleous, Thoas, De\'efpyrus,\
          then Meriones and Antilochus, both skilled\
          in war shouts. He spoke to them\'97his words had wings:\
          \
          \'93Shame on you Argives, nothing but young boys!\
          I\'92m counting on your strength to save our ships.\
[110] If you\'92re holding back in this grim fight,                                     \
          then now\'92s the day the Trojans overcome us.\
          Alas! What my eyes witness here astounds me,\
          a dreadful thing I never thought would happen\'97                                  \
          Trojans moving up to our own ships,\
          men who previously were shy, like deer,\
          which in the woods are prey to jackals,\
          wolves, and leopards, as they wander round,\
          alone and frightened, with no will to fight.\
          Before now, Trojans never wished to stand\
[120] confronting the fierce fighting power                                         \
          of Achaean arms, not even for a moment.\
          But now, far from their city, they fight here,\
          right by our hollow ships. And the reason\'92s this\'97\
          our leadership\'92s been bad, our army slack.\
          For those who quarrel with our general\
          won\'92t protect our fast-moving ships from harm,                                    \
          and so are being cut down among them there.\
          But even if wide-ruling Agamemnon,\
          heroic son of Atreus, is to blame,\
[130] if he really is the reason for all this,                                            \
          because he treated swift Achilles badly,\
          in this battle we must hold back nothing.\
          Let\'92s fix all this\'97and quickly. In their hearts    \
          fine men can change. It\'92s bad if you restrain\
          your fighting spirit any longer,\
          especially you, the best of all our troops.\
          Myself, I wouldn\'92t argue with a man\
          not keen to fight because he is a coward.\
          But in you my heart is disappointed.\
[140] Friends, by this hanging back you\'92ll help to make                                 \
          an even worse disaster. Let each of you\
          feel shame and indignation in his heart.\
          A great battle has just started. Hector,\
          skilled at war cries, is fighting by our ships.\
          His force has smashed our gates, our long bolts, too.\'94\
          \
          By rousing men this way, Earthshaker Poseidon\
          pushed Achaeans into action. Round both Ajaxes\
          soldiers made a stand and strongly held their ground.\
          If Ares had come there, he would have approved of them,\
[150] as would Athena, who inspires men in war.                                         \
          Those known for their great bravery did not back off.\
          They fought lord Hector and the Trojans spear for spear,                               \
          shield with layered shield, in close-packed formation,\
          shields linked together and helmet touching helmet,\
          troops shoulder to shoulder. As men moved their heads,\
          horsehair crests on shining helmet ridges touched\'97\
          that\'92s how densely packed they stood in that formation.\
          Their strong hands held the spears out so they overlapped.\
          Their minds were firm and fully ready for the fight.\
          \
[160] The Trojans came on in a mass, led by Hector,                                   \
          always charging forward, like a rolling boulder,\
          which some river in a winter flood dislodges\
          from a cliff beside its banks, its great flood eroding\
          what supports that lethal stone. In its fall, it bounces\'97\
          woods crash underneath it, as it accelerates                                                    \
          in a straight line, unimpeded\'97then it hits the plain,\
          where, for all its impetus, its motion stops.\
          That\'92s how Hector threatened then to smash his way\
          with ease down to the sea, to Achaea\'92s huts and ships.\
[170] But when he ran into the tight-packed lines of men,                           \
          he came close but was held in check. Achaea\'92s sons\
          faced up to him with swords, with double-bladed spears,\
          and pushed him back. Shaken, Hector had to give ground.\
          He let out a piercing shout, calling to his Trojans:\
          \
          \'93Trojans, Lycians, you Dardan spearmen,                                              \
          hold your place. Achaeans won\'92t keep me back,\
          not for long. Even though they\'92ve set themselves\
          in a defensive wall, I think they will retreat\
          before my spear, if the greatest of the gods,\
[180] Hera\'92s loud-thundering mate, inspires me.\'94                               \
          \
          Saying this, Hector gave heart and spirit to each man.\
          De\'efphobus, son of Priam, moved out before them,\
          full of ambitious hopes. Holding his round shield\
          in front of him, he stepped lightly forward,\
          under cover of that shield. Then Meriones\
          after taking aim, threw his shining spear at him.\
          He didn\'92t miss. He struck that round leather shield.                                       \
          But the spear did not break through. Before it could,\
          it snapped off at the socket. Then De\'efphobus,\
[190] his heart afraid of warlike Meriones\'92 spear,                                         \
          held his leather shield at arm\'92s length away from him.\
          But Meriones had withdrawn into the group\
          of his companions, upset at his double loss\'97\
          the victory and the spear which he\'92d just shattered.\
          He set off for the Achaean huts and ships,\
          to fetch another spear he\'92d left inside his hut.\
          \
          The others kept on fighting. The din was constant.\
          The first to kill a man was Teucer, son of Telamon.                                             \
          He slew Imbrius, a spearman, son of Mentor,\
[200] who owned many horses. He\'92d lived in Pedaeum                                \
          before Achaea\'92s sons arrived. He married\
          one of Priam\'92s bastard daughters, Medesicaste.\
          When the curved ships of the Danaans came to Troy,\
          he went back. The people there thought much of him.\
          He lived with Priam, who honoured him as well,\
          as if he were his child. But the son of Telamon\
          with a long spear thrust hit Imbrius below the ear.\
          Teucer pulled the weapon back. Imbrius collapsed.\
          Just as an ash tree growing on a mountain top,\
[210] visible from every side, is chopped down by bronze,                                      \
          its foliage crashing to the ground\'97that\'92s how he fell.\
          His armour, finely decorated bronze, rang out,\
          reverberating round him. Teucer then jumped out,\
          eager to strip away his armour, but as he charged,\
          Hector threw a shining spear at him. Teucer,\
          seeing it coming, safely dodged the bronze spear point.\
          But Hector\'92s spear hit Amphimachus, son of Cteatus,\
          Actor\'92s son, in the chest, as he was coming up,\
          about to join the battle. He fell with a crash,\
[220] his armour echoing around him. Hector ran up,                                  \
          eager to tug away the helmet tightly bound\
          around the temples of brave Amphimachus.\
          But with his bright spear Ajax lunged at Hector,                                             \
          as he came forward. He didn\'92t touch his flesh,\
          for Hector was encased in terrifying bronze.\
          But Ajax struck the central boss on Hector\'92s shield,\
          and his great power pushed him back. Hector withdrew\
          and left the corpses, so Achaeans dragged them off.\
          Amphimachus was carried back to the Achaean troops\
[230] by Stichius and by noble Menestheus,                                                 \
          who led Athenian troops. The two Ajaxes,\
          still full of battle rage, hauled Imbrius away.\
          As two lions snatch a goat from sharp-toothed hounds,\
          then take it in their jaws off through thick underbrush,\
          holding it well off the ground, that\'92s how both Ajaxes                                    \
          held Imbrius up. They stripped off his armour.\
          In his anger at the killing of Amphimachus,\
          O\'eflean Ajax hacked through the tender neck,\
          then, with a swing of his body, threw away the head,\
[240] like some ball, into the crowd. It fell into the dust,                             \
          right at Hector\'92s feet.\
          \
          At that point, Poseidon,\
          angry that his grandson Amphimachus had died\
          in that harsh fight, went through Achaea\'92s huts and ships,\
          rousing Achaeans, planning trouble for the Trojans.\
          He met the famous spearman Idomeneus                                                        \
          coming from a comrade who\'92d just left the fight.\
          A sharp bronze blow had struck him in the knee.\
          His companions brought him in. Idomeneus,\
          having issued his instructions to the healers,\
[250] was going to his hut, still eager to fight on.                                         \
          The mighty Earthshaker spoke to him, making his voice\
          sound like Thoas, son of Andraemon, who ruled\
          Aetolians all through Pleuron and steep Calydon,\
          honoured by his people like a god:\
          \
                                                                          \'93Idomeneus,\
          Cretan counsellor, what\'92s happened to those threats\
          Achaea\'92s sons once made against the Trojans?\'94                                     \
          \
          Idomeneus, Cretan leader, then said in reply:\
          \
          \'93As far as I know, Thoas, no one\'92s to blame.\
          For all of us are very skilled in fighting,\
[260] and no one is timid here or frightened,                                       \
          or, gripped by doubts, holds back from evil war.\
          Somehow it must please Cronos\'92 mighty son\
          that Achaeans perish now without a name,\
          far from Argos. But Thoas, in times past,\
          you were a man who always stood his ground\
          and encouraged other men to do the same,\
          if you saw someone shirking. Don\'92t stop now.\
          Issue your instructions to each man.\'94                                                     \
          \
          Earthshaker Poseidon then replied:\
          \
          \'93Idomeneus,\
[270] may the man who will not fight today,                                       \
          and willingly, never return from Troy.\
          May he become a toy for dogs to play with.\
          But get your armour and then come with me.\
          If we\'92re to work well, we must work together,\
          although we\'92re only two. For courage\
          of the highest sort comes when men combine,\
          even among men worth very little,\
          and we two know how to battle with the best.\'94\
          \
          Having said this, Poseidon went away, a god\
[280] among the toiling men, and Idomeneus                                               \
          went into his well-made hut, strapped fine armour                                          \
          round his body, took two spears and then strode out,\
          looking like a lightning bolt which Cronos\'92 son\
          grips in his hand and hurls down from bright Olympus,\
          revealing in its dazzling flash a sign for mortal men,\
          that\'92s how, as he moved, bronze glinted on his chest.\
          \
          Meriones, his brave attendant, met him\
          close by the hut. He\'92d come in search of a bronze spear.\
          Strong Idomeneus said to him:\
          \
          \'93Meriones,\
[290] swift-footed son of Molus, the companion                                 \
          I cherish most, why have you come here,                                               \
          leaving the war and giving up the fight?\
          Have you been hurt? Or wounded by a spear?\
          Are you in pain? Or have you come with news?\
          Me, I don\'92t want to stay here in my hut.\
          I want to fight.\'94\
          \
          Wise Meriones then replied:\
          \
          \'93Idomeneus, counsellor of bronze-armed Cretans,\
          I\'92ve come to get a spear, if by any chance\
          there\'92s one left in your huts. The one I had\
[300] shattered in pieces when I hit the shield                                     \
          of that arrogant fighter De\'efphobus.\'94\
          \
          To this, Idomeneus, Cretan leader, then replied:\
          \
          \'93Spears? As many as you want\'97in my hut                                            \
          twenty-one stand against the sunny wall,\
          Trojans spears I take from warriors I kill.\
          I never think of fighting hostile troops\
          from far away\'97that\'92s why I\'92ve got there\
          brightly shining spears and embossed shields,\
          with helmets, too, and body armour.\'94\
          \
[310] Wise Meriones then answered Idomeneus:                                          \
          \
          \'93In my hut, too, and in my black ship,\
          there\'92s lots of Trojan loot. But it\'92s not close\'97\
          too inconvenient. For I can claim\
          I don\'92t neglect my fighting prowess.\
          Whenever battles start, I stand and fight\
          with men in front, in those encounters                                                   \
          where men win glory. Other Achaeans\
          might not know my fighting quality, but you,\
          I think you\'92ve seen it for yourself.\'94\
          \
[320] Idomeneus, leader of the Cretans, answered Meriones:                       \
          \
          \'93I know your courage. Why talk that way?\
          If by the ships right now we were naming\
          the best men for an ambush, where one sees\
          a warrior\'92s courage most conspicuously,\
          where cowards and brave men truly show themselves\'97\
          for a coward\'92s colour always changes,\
          the man\'92s so nervous he just can\'92t sit still,                                             \
          shifting around, resting first on one foot,\
          then another, heart pounding in his chest,\
[330] his mind preoccupied with thoughts of death,                            \
          and his teeth keep chattering in his mouth,\
          while a brave man\'92s colour never changes,\
          he feels no great fear as he takes his place\
          in the group selected for the ambush,\
          no\'97he prays the killing will soon start.\
          In such a scene no one could challenge you,\
          or fault your battle rage or your strong arms.\
          For if, in the middle of the fighting,\
          some flying weapon hit you, or you were stabbed,\
[340] that weapon wouldn\'92t strike your neck or body                         \
          in the back. No, you\'92d be hit in front,                                                    \
          in chest or stomach, as you charged ahead,\
          getting your joy from fighting at the front.\
          But let\'92s not chat about this any longer,\
          standing here as if we were young children.\
          That could make some people very angry.\
          Go in my hut. Get yourself a heavy spear.\'94\
          \
          Idomeneus finished. Then Meriones,\
          like swift Ares, quickly took a bronze spear from the hut.\
[350] Filled with an urge to fight, he went with Idomeneus.                         \
          Just as man-killing Ares sets off to battle\
          accompanied by his son Terror, just as strong,\
          as fearless, who makes any man afraid,                                                           \
          no matter how courageous he may be\'97the two of them\
          setting out from Thrace, having armed themselves to fight\
          Ephyreans or brave Phlegyans, giving glory\
          to one of them, without listening to either side\'97\
          that\'92s how Meriones and Idomeneus,\
          leaders of men, set off to battle, fully armed\
[360] in glittering bronze. Meriones was the first to speak:                           \
          \
          \'93Son of Deucalion, where do you think\
          we should rejoin the fight? On the right side\
          of the whole army, the middle, or the left?\
          To my mind, this last place is the one\
          where long-haired Achaeans stand most in need.\'94                                 \
          \
          Cretan leader Idomeneus answered Meriones:\
          \
          \'93In the middle there are other men\
          to shore up the troops\'97the two Ajaxes,\
          Teucer, too, the best Achaean archer,\
[370] good in hand-to-hand combat as well.                                            \
          Those warriors will give Hector, Priam\'92s son,\
          all he can handle, even if he\'92s keen\
          to fight and really strong. He\'92ll find it hard,\
          though in full battle frenzy, to overcome\
          their spirit, their all-powerful hands,\
          and then burn the fleet, unless Zeus himself,\
          son of Cronos, hurls a flaming firebrand                                                    \
          on our swift ships. That son of Telamon,\
          great Ajax, will not yield to any mortal man\
[380] who eats Demeter\'92s grain, who can be smashed                           \
          by massive rocks or bronze. He\'92d not give way\
          in a stand-up fight, not even to Achilles,\
          who destroys ranks of men and is so fast\'97\
          in running no one can beat Achilles.\
          No, we should move toward the army\'92s left,\
          as you say, find out as soon as possible\
          if we\'92ll win glory or give it to another.\'94\
          \
          Idomeneus spoke. Like swift Ares, Meriones\
          led the way until they reached the army,\
[390] where Idomeneus had instructed him to go.                                        \
          When Trojans saw mighty Idomeneus,                                                            \
          like some flame, and his attendant Meriones\
          in his richly shining armour, they called out\
          to each other in the crowd, then made a massive charge.\
          \
          By the ships\'92 sterns both sides met in frantic battle.\
          Just as keen winds sometimes whip up gusts of air,\
          when dirt lies heavy on the roads, and stir up\
          all the dust into huge clouds\'97that\'92s how this fight\
          gathered momentum then. In that crowd, men\'92s hearts\
[400] were set to slaughter one another with sharp bronze.                         \
          That man-destroying combat bristled with long spears\
          gripped by men to hack each other\'92s flesh apart.\
          As troops moved up tightly bunched, men\'92s eyes went blind                          \
          in the blaze of glittering bronze, glaring helmets,\
          finely polished body armour, gleaming shields.\
          It would take a hard man to find joy in the sight\
          of all that suffering and show no trace of sorrow.\
          \
          Then two mighty sons of Cronos, at cross purposes,\
          made painful trouble for those mortal warriors.\
[410] Zeus wanted victory for Hector and his Trojans,                                \
          to give swift Achilles glory\'97not that he wished\
          Achaea\'92s army to be totally destroyed\
          in front of Troy, but he did want to honour Thetis,                                         \
          and her great-hearted son, as well, Achilles.\
          But Poseidon moved around among the Argives,\
          urging action, coming out in secret from the sea,\
          angry that Trojans were destroying Achaeans,\
          and incensed at Zeus. Both gods had a common father\'97\
          the same family, too\'97but Zeus was older and more wise.\
[420] So Poseidon avoided giving any overt help.                                        \
          He did his work in secret through the army,\
          in human form, urging men to fight. So these two\
          looped the cords of powerful war and deadly strife\
          around both contending armies, then pulled them taut,\
          a knot no one could undo or slip away from,\
          a knot that broke the limbs of many fighting men.                                          \
          \
          Idomeneus, though old enough to have grey hair,\
          called out to the Danaans and then charged the Trojans,\
          driving them away. He killed Othryoneus,\
[430] a man from Cabesus, who now lived in Troy.                                      \
          He\'92d come recently, responding to the news of war.\
          He\'92d asked to marry Cassandra, most beautiful\
          of Priam\'92s daughters, without paying a bride price.\
          Instead he\'92d promised a great action, saying he\'92d drive\
          Achaea\'92s sons from Troy. Old Priam had agreed,\
          promising he\'92d give her to him. Othryoneus,\
          trusting the king\'92s promises, went off to fight.\
          Aiming his shining spear at him, Idomeneus threw.                                         \
          The spear struck him as he was striding forward.\
[440] The bronze breastplate he was wearing didn\'92t help him\'97                  \
          the spear lodged in his gut. He fell down with a crash.\
          Then Idomeneus cried out in triumph:\
          \
          \'93Othryoneus,\
          of all mortal men I\'92d consider you\
          the happiest, if you\'92d accomplished\
          all those things you promised Dardan Priam,\
          so he\'92d give you his daughter. But come,\
          we\'92ll make you the same proposition\'97\
          and we\'92ll deliver. We\'92ll give you the loveliest\
          of Agamemnon\'92s daughters, bring her here\
[450] from Argos, so you can wed her, if you,                                     \
          for your part, will join us to destroy\
          the well-built city Ilion. So let\'92s go.                                                        \
          We can arrange the marriage contract\
          by our seaworthy ships. We\'92ll be generous\
          about your marriage price.\'94\
          \
          As he said this,\
          warrior Idomeneus dragged him by the feet\
          through lines of fighting men. But Asius then stepped up\
          to guard Othryoneus. He was on foot,\
          going before his horses, which his charioteer\
[460] kept so close they breathed on Asius\'92 shoulders.                                 \
          He\'92d set his heart on hitting Idomeneus.\
          But Idomeneus was too quick for him.\
          He hit Asius with a spear below his chin,\
          forcing the bronze straight through his neck. Asius fell.\
          Just as a mountain oak, poplar, or tall pine falls,\
          cut down by working men with freshly sharpened axes,                                  \
          to make timbers for some ship, that how Asius lay,\
          stretched out there before his chariot and horses,\
          gagging, his fingers clawing at the bloody dust.\
[470] His charioteer, scared out of whatever wits he\'92d had,                         \
          didn\'92t think of wheeling round his horses to escape\
          his enemies\'92 hands. Taking aim, bold Antilochus\
          speared him in the stomach. The bronze breastplate he wore\
          was no protection. The spear struck in his stomach.\
          He fell out of the well-made chariot gasping.\
          Antilochus, brave Nestor\'92s son, then drove the horses                                    \
          from the Trojans over to well-armed Achaeans.\
          \
          Grieving the loss of Asius, De\'efphobus\
          came up to Idomeneus and hurled his polished spear.\
[480] Idomeneus, seeing him clearly, dodged the spear,                               \
          covering himself with the round shield he carried,\
          one made of bull\'92s hide and shining bronze in rings,\
          with two cross braces fitted on. Idomeneus\
          crouched down underneath this shield. The flying bronze\
          grazed the metal with a rasping sound. But that throw\
          from the strong arm of De\'efphobus wasn\'92t wasted.                                          \
          His spear hit Hypsenor, son of Hippasus,\
          his people\'92s shepherd, low down in the liver.\
          His legs collapsed. De\'efphobus gave a noisy shout,\
          boasting aloud about his triumph:\
          \
[490] \'93Now Asius                                             \
          is avenged! As he goes down to Hades,\
          the mighty gatekeeper, his heart, I think,\
          will be pleased I\'92ve given him an escort.\'94\
          \
          De\'efphobus spoke. His boast depressed the Argives,\
          and gave special pain to warlike Antilochus.\
          Despite his sorrow, Antilochus did not forget\
          his comrade. He came running up and stood over him,                                   \
          with his shield above his body. Two loyal companions,\
          Mecistus, son of Echius, and Alastor, bent down,\
[500] then carried Hypsenor groaning to the hollow ships.                           \
          \
          Idomeneus did not relent his fighting frenzy.\
          He kept on trying to wrap some Trojan soldier\
          in death\'92s dark night or to fall himself, defending\
          Achaeans from disaster. He killed Alcathous,\
          dear warrior son of divinely bred Aesyetes,\
          Anchises\'92 son-in-law. He\'92d married Hippodamia,\
          eldest of the daughters. Her mother and father\
          had set their heart\'92s love on her when she was at home.                                 \
          She surpassed all girls her age in beauty, work,\
[510] good sense. That\'92s why the very finest man in Troy                            \
          had married her. Now at Idomeneus\'92 hands\
          Poseidon slaughtered Alcathous. The god cast a spell\'97\
          he covered his bright eyes and froze his glistening limbs,\
          so he couldn\'92t flee or dodge the spear, but stood there,\
          motionless, like a pillar or some high leafy tree.\
          Warrior Idomeneus hit him with his spear\
          square in the chest, shattering the bronze breastplate,\
          which earlier had kept his skin untouched by death.                                       \
          But now it cracked aloud as the spear ripped through.\
[520] He fell with a crash, the spear stuck in his chest.                                \
          The power of his heart beat made that spear shaft quiver,\
          right to the butt, until great Ares stilled its force.\
          Idomeneus then spoke out, boasting aloud\
          about his triumph:\
          \
          \'93De\'efphobus,\
          since you like to brag this way, my friend,\
          shall we now call it even, three men killed\
          a fair exchange for one? Why don\'92t you step out\'97\
          face me here, so you can see for yourself\
          what kind of child of Zeus confronts you.\
[530] Zeus first fathered Minos to rule Crete.                                                \
          Minos then fathered worthy Deucalion.\
          Deucalion fathered me, a king ruling\
          many men in spacious Crete. Now my ships\
          have brought me here as a destroying force,\
          against you, your father, and other Trojans.\'94\
          \
          Idomeneus spoke. De\'efphobus was of two minds\'97\
          should he step back and pick out a companion\
          from stout-hearted Trojans, or should he try to fight\
          all on his own? As he thought about his options,\
[540] he thought his best plan was to find Aeneas.                                       \
          He met him standing at the back, among the crowd,\
          for Aeneas, who excelled among the warriors,\
          always resented Priam for not showing him                                                     \
          enough respect. De\'efphobus approached Aeneas,\
          then spoke to him\'97his words had wings.\
          \
          \'93Aeneas, Trojan counsellor,\
          now you must defend your brother-in-law,\
          if you feel any grief. It\'92s urgent.\
          Come with me and fight for Alcathous,\
          who was your sister\'92s husband. He raised you\
[550] as an infant in his home. Now Idomeneus,                                 \
          that celebrated spearman, has just killed him.\'94             \
          \
          De\'efphobus finished. His words stirred the heart\
          in Aeneas\'92 chest. He strode off to face Idomeneus,\
          fiercely eager for this fight. But no fear gripped                                               \
          Idomeneus, as if he were some pampered child.\
          He stood his ground. Just as a wild mountain boar,\
          trusting its own strength, stands firm against a mob,\
          a crowd of men who chase it in some lonely place,\
          with hair bristling along its back, its eyes lit up,\
[560] like fire, gnashing its teeth ferociously, eager                                      \
          to toss dogs and men aside\'97that\'92s just the way\
          the famous spearman Idomeneus stood then,\
          without backing off, as swift Aeneas came at him.\
          He called out to the companions he could see,\
          Ascalaphus, Aphareus, De\'efpyrus, Meriones,\
          Antilochus\'97all famous for their war shouts.\
          Idomeneus yelled, urging them to help him\'97\
          his words had wings:                                                                                         \
          \
          \'93My friends\'97over here!\
          I\'92m alone, so bring some help. I\'92m worried.\
[570] Aeneas, who moves fast, is coming at me.                                 \
          He\'92s powerful at killing men in battle.\
          He\'92s also in the flower of his youth,\
          when strength is at its peak. Were I his age\
          and both of us had equal courage,\
          he or I would soon win a huge victory.\'94\
          \
          Idomeneus finished. All his companions,\
          united by a common spirit, came at his call.\
          They stood beside him as a unit, sloping their shields\
          down from their shoulders. On his side, Aeneas\
[580] called out to those companions he\'92d caught sight of\'97                       \
          De\'efphobus, Paris, and Agenor\'97leaders,                                                         \
          just as he was, of those Trojan warriors.\
          Men came up behind them. Just as a flock of sheep\
          follows the ram from pasture to their water,\
          filling the shepherd\'92s heart with joy, so Aeneas\
          was happy in his chest to see that band of soldiers\
          standing there around him.\
          \
          The men now battled on,\
          close combat with long spears, over Alcathous.\
          As they lunged at one another in the crowd of men,\
[590] their bronze chests echoed with the fearful noise.                               \
          Two men stood out above the rest for bravery\'97\
          Aeneas and Idomeneus, equals of Ares,                                                          \
          striving to slash each other\'92s flesh with ruthless bronze.\
          First, Aeneas threw a spear at Idomeneus,\
          who, seeing it coming, eluded the bronze spear,\
          which then impaled itself in earth, still quivering\'97\
          it had flown from that strong hand but missed its target.\
          Then Idomeneus struck Oenomaus in the stomach,\
          smashing the front plate on his body armour.\
[600] His bowels spilled out, as he dropped in the dust                                \
          and clutched the dirt. Idomeneus yanked his long spear\
          out of the corpse. But he couldn\'92t strip away                                                  \
          any of the lovely armour on its shoulders,\
          for he was being attacked with flying weapons.\
          His lower limbs were no longer fast enough\
          for him to charge in quickly after his own spear\
          or dodge aside. He could keep grim death at bay\
          in pitched battle, but that\'92s all his legs could do\'97\
          they were too slow for him to run away from combat.\
[610] As Idomeneus retreated step by step,                                                  \
          De\'efphobus tried to hit him with a shining spear\'97\
          he\'92d always hated Idomeneus\'97but he missed,\
          hitting Ascalaphus instead, a son of Ares.\
          The heavy spear passed straight through his shoulder.\
          He collapsed in the dust, hands clawing at the ground.                                   \
          \
          Loud-voiced mighty Ares was not yet aware\
          his own son had fallen in the killing zone.\
          He sat on the highest part of Mount Olympus,\
          under golden clouds, confined by Zeus\'92 will,\
[620] along with the rest of the immortal gods,                                            \
          forbidden to participate in warfare.\
          \
          The close fighting over Ascalaphus continued.\
          De\'efphobus stripped off the corpse\'92s shining helmet.\
          But Meriones, like swift Ares, jumped out\
          and speared him in the arm. The plumed helmet,\
          with a clang, fell on the ground. Like a vulture,                                              \
          Meriones leapt out again, pulled the heavy spear\
          out of his upper arm, then moved back to his group,\
          But De\'efphobus\'92 blood brother Polites,\
[630] with both arms round his waist, hauled him from the fight,                \
          until he came to his swift horses in the rear.\
          They were standing there, waiting for him,\
          with charioteer and finely decorated chariot.\
          These took him away, back to the city, tired out,\
          moaning heavily, blood dripping from his wounded arm.\
          The rest kept fighting, with no let up in the noise.                                          \
          \
          Then Aeneas went at Aphareus, son of Caletor,\
          as he was facing him. His sharp spear hit his throat.\
          Aphareus\'92 head snapped back\'97his shield and helmet\
[640] fell down on him, and Death, which takes the living spirit,                 \
          gathered him in.\
          \
          Antilochus kept watching Tho\'f6n.\
          As he turned, he rushed up and stabbed him,\
          severing the vein which runs the full length of the back\
          up to the neck\'97Antilochus slashed through this vein.\
          Tho\'f6n fell, stretching his arms up from the dust,\
          reaching to his friends. Antilochus jumped on him\
          and began to strip the armour on his shoulders.                                              \
          But he kept his eyes alert, for he was surrounded,\
          with Trojan men on every side, thrusting their spears\
[650] at his broad shining shield. But their ruthless bronze                          \
          could not scratch the tender skin behind that shield,\
          for Earthshaker Poseidon was guarding Nestor\'92s son,\
          even in that hail of spears. So Antilochus\
          never moved far from his enemies. He kept going,\
          ranging around among them. His spear never stopped,\
          always in motion, quivering, his eager heart\
          keen to throw that spear at someone or attack him.\
          \
          As Antilochus went through that crowd of men,                                             \
          he was observed by Adamas, son of Asius,\
[660] who charged close in\'97his sharp bronze spear struck                         \
          the middle of his shield. But dark-haired Poseidon,\
          unwilling to concede Antilochus\'92 life,\
          made the spear point fail\'97so part of it got stuck\
          in Antilochus\'92 shield, like the charred end of a stick,\
          and half fell on the ground. Adamas then withdrew,\
          returning to the group of his companions,\
          avoiding death. But Meriones went after him,\
          as he moved back, and hit him underneath his navel,\
          in the scrotum, the most agonizing way\
[670] for men to perish miserably in battle.                                                  \
          When that spear struck Adamas, he doubled up,                                             \
          bent down over the spear, writhing like a bull\
          which farmers in the mountains bind with willow shoots\
          and drag along by force, against the creature\'92s will.\
          That\'92s how Adamas, once hit, twitched there for a while,\
          but not for long. Warlike Meriones, running up,\
          pulled out his spear. Then darkness covered up his eyes.\
          \
          At close quarters, Helenus then hit De\'efpyrus,\
          striking his helmet with a massive Thracian sword,\
[680] knocking it off, so it fell to earth and rolled away                               \
          among the soldiers\'92 feet. Some Achaean picked it up.\
          De\'efpyrus\'92 eyes grew cloudy, and darkness took him.\
          \
          Atreus\'92 son Menelaus, skilled at war shouts,                                                   \
          was overcome with grief. He stepped up, threatening\
          and waving a sharp spear at warrior Helenus.\
          Helenus pulled back on the centre of his bow.\
          They both let fly together\'97one with a sharp spear,\
          the other with an arrow from his bowstring.\
          Priam\'92s son hit Menelaus with his arrow\'97\
[690] on the front plate of his armour, in the chest.                                      \
          The keen arrow bounded off. Just as black beans or peas\
          fly off a broad shovel on large threshing floors,\
          driven by the sharp wind or winnower\'92s strength\'97                                        \
          that\'92s how the arrow point glanced off the breast plate,\
          then flew aside, away from glorious Menelaus.\
          When Atreus\'92 son Menelaus, skilled at war shouts,\
          threw his spear, he hit Helenus in the hand,\
          the one which held the finely polished bow.\
          The bronze sliced through his hand into the bow.\
[700] Helenus drew back into the group of his companions,                        \
          escaping death. He let his hand hang by his side,\
          dragging the ash spear behind him, till brave Agenor\
          pulled it out. Agenor then bound up his hand\
          in a strip of twisted sheep\'92s wool and made a sling,\
          which his attendant carried for him, his people\'92s shepherd.                            \
          \
          Then Peisander made straight for glorious Menelaus.\
          But an evil fate was leading him towards his death,\
          destroyed at your hands, Menelaus, in lethal war.\
          When the two men had approached each other,\
[710] standing at close range, Menelaus threw but missed\'97                        \
          his spear point was deflected. Then Peisander struck,\
          hitting glorious Menelaus\'92 shield, but his bronze\
          could not break through. The broad shield withstood the blow,\
          which snapped the spear off at its socket. But in his heart,\
          Peisander still felt a joyful hope of victory.\
          The son of Atreus pulled out his silver-studded sword,                                   \
          then leapt at Peisander, who, from under his own shield,\
          produced a fine axe of well-cast bronze, with a long shaft\
          of finely-polished olive wood. The two men met.\
[720] Peisander struck Menelaus on his helmet ridge,                                  \
          at the top, just underneath the horsehair crest.\
          But as Peisander charged, Menelaus hit him\'97\
          right on the forehead, just above his nose.\
          The bones cracked. Both his bloody eyes fell out\
          into the dirt beside his feet. Peisander doubled up\
          and then collapsed. Menelaus stepped on his chest,\
          stripped off his armour, crying out in triumph:\
          \
          \'93You arrogant Trojans, who can\'92t get enough                                        \
          of war\'92s destructive noise, this is the way\
[730] you\'92ll go back from these ships of the Danaans,                        \
          who ride fast horses. You\'92re not reluctant,\
          where insults and dishonour are concerned,\
          to go after me, you worthless mongrel dogs,\
          without fearing in your hearts harsh anger\
          from thundering Zeus, god of hospitality,\
          who some day will destroy your lofty town.\
          For you carried off the wife I married,\
          lots of my property, and brought them here,\
          although she\'92d entertained you royally\
[740] in her own home. Now you\'92re madly eager                                \
          to throw deadly fire on our sea-going ships,\
          to kill Achaean warriors. But you\'92ll be stopped,                                     \
          no matter how much you now want to fight.\
          O Father Zeus, people say for wisdom\
          you exceed all others, men and gods alike.\
          Yet all this comes from you, the way you show\
          favours to these insolent men, these Trojans,\
          whose aggressive spirit has no limit,\
          who can never get enough of battle,\
[750] though they\'92re not winning in an equal fight.                             \
          To all things there is a limit set\'97to sleep,\
          to love, sweet songs, and gorgeous dancing.\
          A man would rather have his fill of these, not war.\
          But Trojans here are gluttons for a fight.\'94\
          \
          After Menelaus spoke, he stripped the body,                                                   \
          then gave its bloody armour to his comrades.\
          He went back and rejoined those fighting in the front.\
          \
          The next man to charge against him was Harpalion,\
          son of king Pylamenes, who came to fight at Troy\
[760] following his dear father. But he never did return                               \
          to his own country. With his spear at close range,\
          he struck the centre of Menelaus\'92 shield,\
          but the bronze could not penetrate completely.\
          So he drew back into the throng of his companions,\
          escaping death. He looked around him carefully,\
          as he moved, so no warrior\'92s bronze would hit his flesh.\
          But on his way back, Meriones shot at him.                                                    \
          The bronze-tipped arrow hit his right buttock, pushing\
          underneath the bone, going right into the bladder.\
[770] He sat down there, in the arms of his dear comrades,                         \
          choking his life away, convulsing on the ground,\
          like some worm. His dark blood gushed out, soaking the earth.\
          Brave Paphlagonians came up to help Harpalion.\
          They set him in a chariot and took him away,\
          full of sorrow, to sacred Ilion. His father\
          went back with them, in tears, for he could find\
          no satisfaction for the slaughter of his son.\
          \
          Harpalion\'92s death made Paris really angry.                                                      \
          For with the Paphlagonians he\'92d welcomed Paris\
[780] as his guest. In a fit of anger, Paris shot off                                         \
          a bronze-tipped arrow. Now, there was a certain man\
          called Euchenor, son of Polyidus the prophet,\
          a rich, brave man, who lived at home in Corinth.\
          He\'92d set sail knowing full well his deadly fate,\
          for many times his brave old father, Polyidus,\
          had told him\'97he would either die in his own home\
          from some foul disease or be destroyed by Trojans\
          among Achaean ships. Euchenor thus escaped\
          both the stiff penalty exacted by Achaeans\
[790] and deadly sickness\'97he felt worthy in his heart.                                           \
          The arrow Paris shot hit this man by his jaw,\
          right on the ear. At once his spirit left his limbs,\
          and hateful darkness carried him away.\
          \
          Thus the men keep fighting like a blazing fire.\
          But Hector, dear to Zeus, hadn\'92t heard and didn\'92t know\
          how the Achaeans were killing off his army\
          at the left end of the ships. Glory in this battle\
          would soon have been awarded to Achaeans\'97\
          that\'92s how powerfully Earthshaker Poseidon,\
[800] who enfolds the earth, was driving Argives forward,                           \
          helping them with his own strength as well. But Hector\
          charged on from where he\'92d first breached the gates and wall,\
          smashing up the close-packed ranks of the Danaans,                                     \
          right to the ships of Protesilaus and Ajax,\
          drawn up on the beach beside the blue-grey sea.\
          By these ships the wall was lowest. So there the fight\
          with men and horses was particularly fierce.\
          There Boeotians fought, Ionians in long tunics,\
          Locrians, Phthians, and glittering Epeians.\
[810] But they had trouble standing up to Hector\'92s charge,                          \
          as he attacked the ships. They couldn\'92t push him back,\
          away from them, as he came up, like an inferno,\
          not even the finest men of the Athenians,\
          with their leader Menestheus, son of Peteos,                                                   \
          alongside Pheidas, Stichius, and brave Bias,\
          with the Epeians led by Meges, son of Phyleus,\
          Amphion, Dracius, and the Phthians,\
          led by Medon and Podarces, both brave men.\
          Medon was a bastard son of noble O\'efleus\
[820] and Ajax\'92s brother. But he lived in Phylace,                                        \
          far from his native land, for he\'92d killed a man,\
          one related to Eriopis, his stepmother,\
          wife of O\'efleus. Podarcus was Iphicles\'92 son,\
          child of Phylaces. These men in their armour\
          were fighting at the head of those brave Phthians,\
          standing with Boeotians to defend the ships.                                                 \
          \
          Ajax, son of O\'efleus, would not move away\
          from Ajax, son of Telamon\'97he fought beside him.\
          Just as in a meadow a pair of wine-dark oxen\
[830] strain with the same heart to pull a jointed plough,                             \
          beads of sweat running from the bottom of their horns,\
          with nothing but a well-polished yoke between them,\
          as they labour down the furrows, till the plough\
          slices through the edges of the field\'97that\'92s the way\
          the two Ajaxes stood together then, side by side.\
          Telamonian Ajax had many comrades with him,\
          courageous soldiers, who\'92d relieve him of his shield                                       \
          when his sweaty limbs grew tired. But the Locrians\
          had not come forward with brave O\'eflean Ajax\'97\
[840] they lacked courage for fighting in the killing zone,                            \
          for they had no plumed bronze helmets, no round shields,\
          and no ash spears. They\'92d come to Troy with Ajax\
          trusting in their bows and slings of twisted sheep\'92s wool.\
          Later they battled on with these, firing thick volleys,\
          breaking ranks of Trojans. So one group of men,\
          those with glittering weapons, fought at the front\
          against bronze-armed Hector and his Trojans,                                                \
          while another shot from safe positions at the back.\
          The arrows drained the Trojans\'92 fighting spirit.\
          \
[850] The Trojans would then have been shamed into retreat,                     \
          moving back from the ships and huts to windy Troy,\
          if Polydamas hadn\'92t approached bold Hector, saying:\
          \
          \'93You\'92re a difficult man to deal with, Hector,\
          for you don\'92t take advice. God has made you\
          more excellent in war than other men.\
          Thus, in council you want us all to think\
          you\'92re better than the rest. But in yourself\
          you can\'92t be everything at once. The gods\
          make one man superior in warfare,                                                         \
[860] another in the dance, or singing,                                                 \
          or playing the lyre. For some others,\
          all-seeing Zeus puts wisdom in their hearts\'97\
          and from these men many people benefit,\
          many are saved, for such men know what\'92s right.\
          So I\'92ll say what I think it\'92s best to do.\
          All around you war\'92s fiery circle rages,\
          but some brave Trojans, having breached the wall,\
          are standing idle with their weapons.\
          Others, scattered around the ships, fight on\'97\
[870] but in small groups against a larger mass.                                   \
          You should fall back, then summon here to you                                          \
          all our finest men. Then we can weigh our options\'97\
          whether we should assault the well-decked ships,\
          in the hope god wants to give us victory,\
          or whether, for safety\'92s sake, we leave the ships.\
          I\'92m afraid Achaeans may avenge the hurt\
          we gave them yesterday, since by their ships\
          there sits a man with appetite for war\'97\
          I think he may change his decision not to fight.\'94\
          \
[880] Polydamas finished. His advice pleased Hector.                                 \
          At once he jumped out of his chariot to the ground.\
          He took up his weapons and spoke\'97his words had wings:                            \
          \
          \'93Polydamas, keep all the best men here.\
          I\'92ll go back to battle over there,\
          returning when I\'92ve told them what to do.\'94\
          \
          Saying that, Hector strode off, like a snowy mountain,\
          going by Trojans and allies, shouting instructions.\
          When these men heard what Hector wanted them to do,\
          they all came running over to Polydamas,\
[890] kind son of Panthous. Hector marched through the ranks                   \
          of their best warriors, looking for De\'efphobus,\
          brave prince Helenus, Adamas, son of Asius,\
          and Asius, son of Hyrtacus. But these men\
          had not come through unscathed. Some were already dead,                            \
          killed at Argive hands by the sterns of Achaea\'92s ships.\
          Others inside the wall had spear or arrow wounds.\
          On the left flank of that destructive battle,\
          Hector met Paris, husband of fair-haired Helen,\
          encouraging his comrades, urging them to fight.\
[900] Approaching him, Hector taunted Paris:                                             \
          \
          \'93You may be the best-looking man around,\
          but you\'92re a useless woman-mad seducer.\
          Where are De\'efphobus, brave prince Helenus,                                        \
          Adamas, son of Asius, and Asius,\
          son of Hyrtacus? Where\'92s Othryoneus?\
          Tell me that. All of high Ilion\
          has been destroyed. Your own death is certain.\'94\
          \
          Then noble Alexander answered Hector:\
          \
          \'93Hector, you\'92re now blaming someone innocent.\
[910] At other times I have held back from war,                                 \
          but not this time. When my mother bore me,\
          she did not produce a total coward.\
          Since the moment you told your men to fight\
          beside the ships, we\'92ve been in combat here,\
          in a constant struggle with Danaans.\
          Those comrades you just mentioned have been killed.                          \
          Only De\'efphobus and brave Helenus\
          have gone back, both wounded in the arm\'97\
          hit by long spears\'97but Zeus saved them from death.\
[920] But now, lead on where your spirit tells you,                             \
          we\'92ll follow you quite willingly. I don\'92t think\
          we\'92ll show a lack of courage while our strength holds out.\
          Once that goes, no matter how keen a man may be,\
          he can no longer continue in the war.\'94\
          \
          Warrior Paris\'92 words won his brother\'92s heart.\
          They set off for the centre of that noisy battle,\
          with Cebriones, noble Polydamas,                                                                   \
          Phalces, Orthaeus, godlike Polyphetes,\
          Palmys, Ascanius, Morus, son of Hippotion,\
[930] men who\'92d come from fertile Ascania the day before                         \
          as reinforcements. Now Zeus incited them to war.\
          The Trojans advanced. Just like blasts of storming winds\
          striking the earth under Father Zeus\'92 thunder,\
          then with a roar slicing into the sea, whipping up\
          a crowd of surging waves across a booming ocean,\
          with lines of arching foam, one following another\'97\
          that how Trojans marched behind their leaders,                                              \
          in a tight formation, one behind the other,\
          glittering in bronze. Like man-destroying Ares,\
[940] Hector, son of Priam, led them. He held his shield                             \
          in front of him, an even circle made of hide,\
          densely packed, then covered with a solid layer\
          of hammered bronze, helmet gleaming round his temples.\
          He moved out, testing all parts of the Achaean lines,\
          to see if they\'92d retreat from him as he came forward\
          covered by his shield. But Achaean hearts stood firm.\
          The first fighter to challenge Hector was great Ajax,\
          who marched out with long strides and shouted:\
          \
          \'93Come closer,                                       \
          you poor man. Why try to scare the Argives?\
[950] When it comes to fighting, we\'92re not ignorant.                           \
          Zeus\'92 harsh whip has lashed Achaeans back,\
          and your heart now wants to break our ships.\
          But we\'92ve got hands to raise in their defence.\
          In fact, I think it\'92s far more likely now\
          we\'92ll take your well-built city\'97these hands of ours\
          will smash it long before you seize our ships.\
          I say the time has come when you\'92ll run back,\
          praying to Father Zeus and other gods,\
          to make your horses with their lovely manes\
[960] fly as fast as hawks, when they speed through dust                    \
          to get you to your city on the plain.\'94                                                      \
          \
          As Ajax spoke, a bird flew out on the right,\
          a high-flying eagle. Encouraged by the omen,\
          the Achaean soldiers responded with a cheer.\
          Glorious Hector then said to Ajax in reply:\
          \
          \'93What are you saying, you stupid boaster?\
          I wish it were as certain that I was\
          the son of aegis-bearing Zeus himself,\
          with Hera for my mother, and honoured\
[970] like Apollo or Athena, as I am that this day                               \
          brings disaster to the Argives\'97all of them.\
          You\'92ll lie among the dead, if you dare\
          to stand up to my long spear. It will slice                                               \
          your lily skin. Then once you fall down there,\
          beside Achaea\'92s ships, Trojan dogs and birds\
          will feed upon your flesh and fat.\'94\
          \
          Hector spoke.\
          Then he advanced\'97the troops moved up behind him,\
          making a huge din, even from soldiers at the back.\
          On the other side, the Argives raised a shout.\
[980] They hadn\'92t lost their courage. They\'92d held their line                         \
          against the finest Trojans launching their attack.\
          The noise from both sides went up into bright Zeus\'92 sky}