{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf460
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural\qc

\f0\fs24 \cf0 Book Fourteen\
Zeus Deceived          \

\i \
[Nestor leaves his hut to look around, sees the Achaeans in retreat; Nestor meets the wounded kings inspecting the field; Agamemnon advises going home; Odysseus responds harshly to the suggestion; Diomedes advises them to visit the battle; Poseidon continues to encourage the Argives; Hera thinks of a plan to deceive Zeus; she prepares herself to look seductive; Hera gets a Aphrodite's love charms; Hera visits Sleep and gets his cooperation;  Hera visits Zeus on Ida, has sex with him, and Zeus goes to sleep; Poseidon rallies the Argives and leads them into battle; Ajax wounds Hector badly with a rock; Hector withdraws; the killings continue on both sides, the Argives getting the better of the battle.]\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\i0 \cf0           \
          As Nestor sat drinking wine, listening to the noise of war,\
          he said to Asclepius\'92 son:\
          \
          \'93Noble Machaon,\
          think about how this battle will end up\'97\
          the shouting from our young men by the ships\
          is getting louder. You should sit here for now.\
          Drink some sparkling wine, till Hecamede\
          with the lovely hair draws you a warm bath\
          and washes the dried blood off your body.\
          I\'92ll go to a lookout, see what\'92s going on.\'94\
          \
  [10] Nestor took the well-made shield belonging to his son,                      \
          horse-taming Thrasymedes. It lay there in the hut,                                          \
          gleaming bronze. The son was fighting with his father\'92s shield.\
          Nestor took a strong spear with a sharp bronze point,\
          then stood outside the hut. At once he saw a shameful sight\'97\
          Achaeans in retreat, pushed back by their enemies,\
          high-hearted Trojans. The Achaean wall was breached.\
          Just as the great sea heaves with a sullen purple swell,\
          anticipating the swift passage of sharp winds\'97\
          but uncertainly\'97so its waves have no direction,\
  [20] until some steady storm blows down from Zeus\'97that\'92s how             \
          the old man was lost in thought, his heart divided                                          \
          between two courses.  Should he seek out the crowd\
          of swift-riding Danaans, or see if he could find\
          Agamemnon, son of Atreus, his people\'92s shepherd?\
          As he thought it over, the best course seemed to be\
          to find the son of Atreus.\
          \
          Meanwhile, the other men\
          kept up the fight, kept on butchering each other.\
          Around their bodies the unwearied bronze rang out,\
          as they thrust with swords and double-bladed spears.\
  [30] Then Nestor came across the kings the gods sustain\'97                       \
          they were walking round among the ships\'97all the ones\
          whom bronze had wounded\'97Diomedes and Odysseus,\
          along with Agamemnon, son of Atreus.\
          \
          They\'92d drawn their ships on shore beside the blue-grey sea,                           \
          far from battle, dragging up their own ships first,\
          hauled them inland, then built the wall along the sterns.\
          The beach was wide, but not long enough for all the fleet.\
          The army didn\'92t have much space to hold the boats.\
          So they\'92d set the ships in rows, and thus filled up\
  [40] the whole wide coastal bay between the headlands.                            \
          The kings had set out in one group together,\
          each one leaning on a spear, to see the fighting\
          and check the progress of the war. Deep in their chests\
          they were very troubled. When old Nestor met them,\
          the anxiety in their Achaean hearts\
          was even more acute. Mighty Agamemnon                                                     \
          spoke to him and said:\
          \
          \'93Nestor, son of Neleus,\
          great glory of Achaeans, why are you here?\
          Why have you left the battle? I\'92m afraid\
  [50] that mighty Hector will make good those words                        \
          he used to threaten us, in that speech\
          he gave his Trojans, saying he\'92d not return\
          from our ships to Troy until he\'92d burned them\
          and slaughtered all the men. That\'92s what he said.\
          And now it\'92s happening. What chaos!\
          Other well-armed Achaeans in their hearts\
          must be angry with me, like Achilles,                                                     \
          unwilling to continue fighting by our ships.\'94\
          \
          Geranian horseman Nestor answered Agamemnon:\
          \
  [60] \'93What\'92s happened so far is over, done with\'97                                    \
          not even high-thundering Zeus himself\
          could make that something else\'97our wall is down.\
          We put our faith in it as a firm defence\
          for ships and for ourselves. At this moment,\
          men are constantly in action by our ships,\
          with no relief. Whichever way you look,\
          even if you really try, you cannot tell\
          from what direction we are being attacked.\
          It\'92s all confused. The killing is haphazard.                                                      \
  [70] The battle shouts fill heaven. As for us,                                              \
          if thinking is a help, we should consider\
          how these events will end. I\'92m not saying\
          we should rejoin the fight\'97that\'92s not expected\
          from those who have been wounded.\'94\
          \
          Agamemnon, king of men, replied:\
          \
          \'93Nestor,\
          since the men now fight at our ships\'92 sterns,\
          and since our strong wall and ditch are useless\'97\
          something crushing for Danaans, whose hearts\
          had trusted they\'92d provide a firm defence\
  [80] and keep our soldiers and our ships secure\'97                             \
          from this I gather that almighty Zeus\
          must enjoy it when Achaeans perish                                                      \
          without a name, right here, far from Argos.\
          I felt when Zeus was giving the Danaans\
          his full assistance, and I know it now,\
          when he gives the glory to the Trojans,\
          like blessed gods, while draining all our strength,\
          our fighting spirit. But come now, let\'92s agree\
          to what I propose. Let\'92s drag down those ships\
  [90] drawn up there in line closest to the surf                                    \
          and pull them all into the sacred sea,\
          and moor them with stones in deeper water,\
          until the coming of immortal night\'97\
          which may prevent the Trojans\'92 fighting.\
          Then we can shift the other ships. To flee\
          from ruin, even at night, brings no shame.                                             \
          It\'92s better to escape one\'92s own destruction\'97\
          to run off\'97than let it overtake you.\'94\
          \
          In response to this, Odysseus scowled and said:\
          \
[100] \'93Son of Atreus, how can such words as these                            \
          come from your mouth? I\'92m finished with you.\
          I wish you ruled some other army,\
          some useless men, and were not our leader.\
          Zeus sees to it that from our youthful days\
          to our old age we must grind away\
          at wretched war, till, one by one, we die.\
          Are you really willing to leave Troy,\
          city of wide streets, for whose sake we\'92ve borne\
          so many evils? You\'92d better keep that quiet\'97                                       \
[110] another Achaean man may hear the news,                                 \
          learn what you\'92ve proposed in words no man\
          should ever let pass through his mouth at all,\
          no man whose heart has any understanding\
          of what\'92s appropriate to say, no one\
          who is a sceptred king whom men obey\'97\
          as many as those Argive troops you lead.\
          From what you\'92ve said, I think you\'92ve lost your mind.\
          In the middle of a fight, you tell us now\
          to drag our well-decked ships down to the sea,\
[120] so that, though Trojans may be winning now,                            \
          they\'92d get what they most pray for realized\'97\
          the complete annihilation of us all.\
          For once we drag our ships into the sea,\
          Achaeans then will never go on fighting\'97                                             \
          the whole time they\'92ll be looking over here\
          and pulling out from battle. Then your plan,\
          you leader of the army, will destroy it.\'94\
          \
          Agamemnon, king of men, replied:\
          \
          \'93Odysseus,\
          that harsh rebuke of yours has stung my heart.\
[130] But I\'92m not the man to tell Achaea\'92s sons                                 \
          to drag our well-decked ships into the sea\
          if they\'92re not willing. So show me someone\
          with a better plan than mine\'97young or old\'97\
          I\'92ll welcome it.\'94\
          \
          Then Diomedes,\
          skilled in battle shouts, spoke up:\
          \
          \'93That man\'92s close by.                              \
          We\'92ve no need to search too long, if you\'92ll listen,\
          without any one of you resenting me\
          because I\'92m younger than the rest of you.\
          I claim worthy descent through Tydeus,\
[140] who lies in Thebes hidden underground.                                    \
          Portheus had three fine sons in Pleuron\
          and steep Calydon\'97Agrius, Melus,\
          and a third, Oeneus, my father\'92s father.\
          He was the most courageous of them all.\
          He stayed there, but my father roamed around.\
          He came to Argos. That was what Zeus willed\'97                                  \
          other gods, as well. He married a daughter\
          of Adrestus, lived in a prosperous home,\
          with many wheat-bearing fields and orchards\
[150] planted all through his estate\'97and many sheep.                       \
          He was the best of all the Argive spearman.\
          You must have heard all this and know it\'92s true.\
          So you would never label me by birth a coward,\
          a weakling, and thus demean what I advise,\
          if what I say is good. We must go back there,\
          to the battle, though we\'92re wounded. Once there,\
          we\'92ll stand back from combat, beyond the range\
          of flying weapons, in case someone is hit                                               \
          and gets more wounds. But we\'92ll urge on the others,\
[160] even those who, wallowing in their feelings,                              \
          have stood aside, without fighting up to now.\'94\
          \
          They listened well to Diomedes and agreed.\
          So they set off, led by Agamemnon, king of men.\
          \
          Famous Earthshaker Poseidon saw all this.\
          He walked among them in the shape of an old man.\
          Taking Atreus\'92 son Agamemnon by his right hand,\
          Poseidon talked to him\'97his words had wings.\
          \
          \'93Son of Atreus, in Achilles\'92 chest\
          his destructive heart is really happy now,                                               \
[170] to see Achaeans slaughtered and in flight.                                  \
          He\'92s not in his right mind, not in the least.\
          Well, he may be killed anyway\'97some god\
          may strike him. As for you, the blessed gods\
          aren\'92t angry with you over anything,\
          so Troy\'92s kings and leaders may yet make dust\
          while scurrying over this wide plain,\
          while you watch them running to their city,\
          back from these huts.\'94\
          \
          Poseidon said these words,\
          then, as he raced off to the plain, let out a mighty roar\'97\
[180] as loud as the din from nine or ten thousand men                               \
          when on a battleground they first clash with Ares.\
          That\'92s how loud the sound was which came out then                                           \
          from powerful Earthshaker\'92s chest, infusing\
          great strength in each man\'92s heart to keep on going,\
          to fight on there and not to pause for rest.\
          \
          As this was happening, on a peak of Mount Olympus\
          Hera of the golden throne was standing watching.\
          She recognized her brother-in-law at once,\
          as he kept busy in the war where men win glory,\
[190] for he was her brother and her husband\'92s, too.                                    \
          Hera\'92s heart was pleased. She looked across at Zeus,\
          sitting on the highest peak on top of Ida,\
          with its many fountains. Hatred filled her heart.\
          So ox-eyed queen Hera then began considering\
          how she might deceive the mind of aegis-bearing Zeus.                                  \
          In her heart the best course of action seemed to be\
          to make herself look most attractive, go to Ida,\
          then see if Zeus would want to lie down with her,\
          embrace her, and make love. Then she could pour out\
[200] on his eyelids and his crafty mind a deep warm sleep.                         \
          She went off to her bedroom, which Hephaestus,\
          her dear son, had made for her, with close-fitting doors\
          set against their posts, secured with a secret lock,\
          which no other god could open. She went in there,\
          then closed the shining doors. First, with ambrosia                                         \
          she washed from her lovely body all the stains,\
          then rubbed her skin with fragrant oil, divinely sweet,\
          made specially for her. If this perfume were merely stirred\
          inside Zeus\'92 bronze-floored house, its scent would then diffuse\
[210] throughout heaven and earth. She used this perfume                          \
          all over her fair body, then arranged her hair.\
          With her own hands she combed her shining locks in braids,\
          a stunning style for an immortal goddess.\
          Then she wrapped around herself a heavenly robe,\
          which Athena made for her from silky fabric,\
          adorning it with gorgeous embroidery.\
          She pinned the robe around her breast with golden brooches.                         \
          On her waist she put a belt with a hundred tassels.\
          Hera then fixed earrings in her pierced ear lobes,\
[220] each with three gemstones, an enchanting glitter.                               \
          Next the queen of goddesses placed on her head\
          a fine new dazzling shawl, white as the sun.\
          She then slipped lovely sandals over her sleek feet.\
          \
          Once Hera had dressed her body in this finery,\
          she left the room and summoned Aphrodite.\
          Some distance from the other gods, she said to her:\
          \
          \'93My dear child, will you agree to do                                                       \
          what I ask of you, or will you refuse,\
          because you\'92re angry with me in your heart,\
[230] since I help Danaans and you aid the Trojans?\'94                         \
          \
          Zeus\'92 daughter Aphrodite answered her:\
          \
          \'93Hera,\
          honoured goddess, daughter of great Cronos,\
          say what\'92s on your mind. My heart tells me\
          I should do what you ask, if I can,\
          if it\'92s something that can be carried out.\'94\
          \
          Then queen Hera, with her devious mind, replied:\
          \
          \'93Then give me Love and Sexual Desire,\
          which you use to master all immortals,\
          and mortal men as well. I\'92m going to visit\
[240] the limits of this all-nourishing earth,                                                    \
          to see Oceanus, from whom the gods arose,\
          and mother Tethys, the two who reared me,\
          taking good care of me inside their home,\
          once they got me from Rhea, that time Zeus,\
          who sees far and wide, forced Cronos\
          underground, under the restless seas.\
          I\'92m going to visit them. And I\'92ll resolve\
          their endless quarrel. For a long time now,\
          they\'92ve stayed apart from one another,\
[250] not sharing love there in the marriage bed,                                 \
          since anger fills their hearts. If my words\
          could reconcile the hearts in these two gods,\
          bring them to bed again, once more in love,\
          they\'92d think of me with loving reverence.\'94                                            \
          \
          Laughter-loving Aphrodite answered Hera:\
          \
          \'93It wouldn\'92t be appropriate for me\
          to say no to your demand, since you sleep\
          in the arms of Zeus, the greatest of the gods.\'94\
          \
          Aphrodite spoke, then loosened from her breasts\
[260] the finely decorated, embroidered garment                                          \
          in which all her magic charms were fixed\'97for love,\
          erotic lust, flirtation, and seduction,\
          which steals the wits even of clear-thinking men.\
          Aphrodite put this in Hera\'92s hands, then said:\
          \
          \'93Take this garment. Tie it round your breasts.\
          Everything is interwoven in the cloth.                                                   \
          I don\'92t think you\'92ll come back unsuccessful\
          in getting what it is your heart desires.\'94\
          \
          Aphrodite finished. Ox-eyed queen Hera smiled,\
[270] and, as she did so, put the garment round her breasts.                        \
          Then Aphrodite, Zeus\'92 daughter, went back home.\
          \
          Hera sped off, leaving the crest of Mount Olympus.\
          She touched down on Pieria, lovely Emathia,\
          rushed by the highest mountains of Thracian horsemen\'97\
          her feet did not touch ground on those snow-covered peaks.\
          From Athos she went across the heaving sea,\
          coming to Lemnos, city of godlike Thoas.                                                       \
          There she met Sleep, Death\'92s brother. Clasping his hand,\
          she spoke to him:\
          \
          \'93Sleep, king of all men and gods,\
[280] if you\'92ve ever listened to what I say,                                          \
          obey me now. I\'92ll be grateful always.\
          Lull Zeus\'92 radiant eyes to sleep for me,\
          when I\'92m stretched out for sex beside him.\
          I\'92ll give you as a gift a lovely throne,\
          indestructible gold which my own son\
          Hephaestus with his ambidextrous skills\
          will make for you. Under it he\'92ll set a stool,                                           \
          so you can rest your feet when drinking wine.\'94\
          \
          Sweet Sleep then said in reply:\
          \
          \'93Honoured goddess Hera,\
[290] daughter of mighty Cronos, I could with ease                            \
          bring some other immortal one to sleep,\
          even the streams of river Ocean,\
          the source of all of them. But I won\'92t come\
          near Zeus, lull him to sleep, unless he bids me,\
          asks in person. Your request some time ago\
          taught me my lesson, on that very day                                                   \
          when Hercules, son of almighty Zeus,\
          set sail from Ilion, after he\'92d sacked\
          the Trojans\'92 city. That\'92s when I seduced\
[300] the mind of aegis-bearing Zeus, pouring                                    \
          my sweetness over him. You then carried\
          evil in your heart for Hercules, driving\
          blasts of hostile winds across the sea,\
          taking him at last to well-settled Cos,\
          far from all his friends. When Zeus woke up,\
          he was incensed, throwing gods around his house,\
          looking, above all, for me. He\'92d have tossed me\
          from heaven into the sea, if Night,\
          who subdues gods and men, had not saved me.                                     \
[310] I ran away to her, and Zeus held back,                                       \
          though still enraged, not wishing to offend\
          swift Night. Now here you are again, asking me\
          to do something I simply must not do.\'94\
          \
          Ox-eyed queen Hera then answered him:\
          \
          \'93Sleep,\
          why concern your heart about these matters?\
          Do you think all-seeing Zeus feels for Trojans\
          the same rage he felt then for Hercules,\
          his own son? But come, I\'92ll give you as your wife\
          one of the younger Graces. You can marry\
[320] Pasithea, whom you long for every day.\'94                                   \
          \
          Hera finished. Sleep was overjoyed and said:                                                  \
          \
          \'93All right, then. Swear to me by waters\
          of the inviolable river Styx, setting\
          one hand on the all-nourishing earth,\
          the other on the shimmering sea,\
          so all may witness our agreement,\
          even those gods underground with Cronos,\
          that you will give me one of the Graces,\
          Pasithea, whom I long for every day.\'94\
          \
[330] White-armed goddess Hera agreed to Sleep\'92s request.                         \
          She made the oath, as he had asked, invoking\
          all the gods under Tartarus, those called the Titans.*                                     \
          Once she\'92d finished saying the oath, they both set off,\
          wrapping themselves in mist. They left behind them\
          the cities of Lemnos and Imbros, moving quickly,\
          then came to Mount Ida with its many springs,\
          mother of wild creatures, and arrived at Lectum,\
          where for the first time they left the sea. They walked\
          on dry land, shaking treetops underneath their feet.\
[340] Sleep then stopped, before Zeus\'92 eyes could see him,                         \
          climbed a high pine tree, at that time the tallest one\
          growing on Ida. It stretched up through the lower air\
          right into the sky. Concealed in that tree\'92s branches,\
          Sleep perched there, shaped like the clear-voiced mountain bird\
          which gods call Chalcis, but people name Cymindis.                                       \
          \
          Hera moved quickly on to Ida\'92s peak, high Gargarus.\
          Cloud-gatherer Zeus caught sight of her. As he looked,\
          his wise heart became suffused with sexual desire,\
          as strong as when they\'92d first made love together,\
[350] lying on a couch without their parents\'92 knowledge.                             \
          Zeus stood up in front of her, called her, and said:\
          \
          \'93Hera, what are you looking for, coming\
          down here from Olympus? Your chariot,\
          your horses are not here. You should use them.\'94\
          \
          Queen Hera with her crafty mind then answered Zeus:                                  \
          \
          \'93I\'92m going to visit the outer limits\
          of this all-nourishing earth, to Oceanus,\
          from whom gods came, and mother Tethys,\
          who looked after me in their own home.\
[360] They raised me well. I\'92ll try to mediate                                      \
          their endless quarrel. For a long time now,\
          they\'92ve stayed apart from one another,\
          not sharing love there in the marriage bed,\
          since anger fills their hearts. As for my horses,\
          they\'92re standing at the foot of Ida,\
          with its many springs, to carry me\
          across dry land and sea. I\'92ve come here now,\
          down from Mount Olympus, to stop you\
          from being angry with me afterwards,                                                    \
[370] if I say nothing about going to visit                                            \
          deep-flowing Oceanus in his home.\'94\
          \
          Cloud-gatherer Zeus then answered:\
          \
          \'93Hera,\
          you can go there later. But why don\'92t we\
          lie down and make joyful love together?\
          I\'92ve never felt such sexual desire before\
          for any goddess, for any mortal woman.\
          It\'92s flooding through me, overpowering the heart\
          here in my chest\'97not even when I lusted for\
          Ixion\'92s wife, who bore me Peirithous,\
[380] a man as wise as gods, or Dana\'eb,                                               \
          with her enchanting ankles, daughter\
          of Acrisius, who gave birth to Perseus,                                                 \
          most illustrious of men, nor the daughter\
          of famous Phoenix, who bore me Minos\
          and godlike Rhadamanthus, nor Alcmene,\
          who gave birth to Hercules in Thebes,\
          a mighty hearted son, nor Semele,\
          who bore that joy to mortals Dionysus,\
          nor fair-haired lady Demeter, nor Leto,\
[390] that glorious girl, not even for yourself\'97                                   \
          I felt for none of these the love I feel\
          for you right now\'97such sweet desire grips me.\'94\
          \
          Queen Hera with her cunning mind then said in reply:\
          \
          \'93Most fearsome son of Cronos, what are you saying?                             \
          If you now want us to make love lying here,\
          on Ida\'92s peaks, where anyone can see,\
          what if one of the immortal gods observes us,\
          as we sleep, then goes and tells the other gods?\
          I could not get up from this bed and go\
[400] into your home. That would be scandalous.                               \
          But if that\'92s your wish, if your heart\'92s set on it,\
          you have that bedroom your own son Hephaestus\
          had built for you. It has close-fitting doors\
          fixed into posts. Let\'92s go and lie down there,\
          since you\'92re so keen for us to go to bed.\'94                                               \
          \
          Cloud-gatherer Zeus then answered her:\
          \
          \'93Hera,\
          don\'92t be afraid that any god or man\
          will glimpse a thing. I\'92ll cover you up\
          in a golden cloud. Even sun god Helios\
[410] will not see the two of us, and his rays                                       \
          are the most perceptive spies of all.\'94\
          \
          Zeus finished. Then Cronos\'92 son took his wife in his arms.\
          Underneath them divine Earth made fresh flowers grow\'97\
          dew-covered clover, crocuses, and hyacinths,\
          lush and soft, to hold the lovers off the ground.\
          They lay together there covered with a cloud,                                                 \
          a lovely golden mist, from which fell glistening dew.\
          Then Zeus slumbered peacefully on Mount Gargarus,\
          overcome with love and sleep, his wife in his embrace.\
          \
[420] Sweet Sleep rushed to the Achaean ships, to inform                           \
          Poseidon, the Encircler and Shaker of the Earth.\
          Coming up to him, Sleep spoke\'97his words had wings:\
          \
          \'93Poseidon, you could now help the Argives\
          quite readily and give them glory,\
          if only for a while\'97Zeus is fast asleep.\
          I\'92ve covered him with a delicious sleep.\
          Hera has seduced him on a bed of love.\'94                                               \
          \
          Saying this, Sleep left there for some well-known tribes of men.\
          But he made Poseidon want to help Danaans,\
[430] even more so than before. He ran to those in front,                            \
          calling in a loud voice:\
          \
          \'93You Argives,\
          are we really going to give the victory\
          to Hector, son of Priam\'97allow him\
          to take our ships and get the glory?\
          That\'92s what he says. He even boasts about it\'97\
          since Achilles stays beside his hollow ships,\
          anger in his heart. But we won\'92t miss him much\
          if the rest of us get fighting strength\
          and help each other. So come, let\'92s all follow                                        \
[440] what I suggest. Let\'92s arm ourselves with shields,                       \
          the best and biggest in our whole army,\
          cover our heads with gleaming helmets,\
          take in our hands the longest spears, and go.\
          I\'92ll lead us. I don\'92t think Hector, Priam\'92s son,\
          will hold, no matter how much he wants to fight.\'94\
          \
          Poseidon spoke. The soldiers heard him and obeyed.\
          The kings themselves, though wounded, organized the men\'97\
          Agamemnon, Diomedes, and Odysseus.                                                         \
          Moving among the warriors, they supervised\
[450] the exchange of weapons. The best men put on                                  \
          the best equipment, the worst men got the worst.\
          Once their bodies were encased in gleaming bronze,\
          they marched out. Earthshaker Poseidon led them,\
          gripping in his powerful fist a fearful sword,\
          with a long edge, like a lightning bolt, which no man\
          in grim battle could withstand\'97his fear would hold him back.\
          On the other side, glorious Hector organized his men.                                    \
          Then he and dark-haired Poseidon launched the fight,\
          the most destructive moments of that battle, \
[460] one commanding Trojans, the other leading Argives.                          \
          The sea surged up to the Achaean huts and ships,\
          as the two sides met with a tremendous noise,\
          louder than ocean surf booming on shore, driven there\
          from the depths by the harsh North Wind, louder, too,\
          than roaring fire as it jumps to burn the trees\
          in some mountain clearing, louder than the wind\
          which howls through the highest branches of some oak tree,\
          a wind which at its worst makes the most piercing noise\'97\
          that\'92s how loud the shouting came from Trojans and Achaeans,                     \
[470] terrifying screams, as they went at each other.                                    \
          \
          Glorious Hector first threw his spear at Ajax,\
          as he\'92d just turned to face him. The spear hit Ajax,\
          right where two straps intersected on his chest,\
          one for his shield, one for his silver-studded sword.\
          These saved his tender flesh. Hector was annoyed\'97\
          his weapon had flown from his hand and missed its mark.\
          He drew back into the group of his companions,\
          evading death. But great Telamonian Ajax\
          hit Hector with a rock as he was moving back\'97\
[480] there were many of them there rolling underfoot,                                           \
          right where they fought, rock wedges used to prop the ships.\
          Ajax picked up one of these and struck Hector\'92s chest,\
          just above the shield rim, close to Hector\'92s neck.\
          The impact spun Hector like a top, reeling\
          round and round. Just like those times Father Zeus\
          uproots some oak tree with a lightning bolt\'97it falls,\
          with an awful smell of sulphur spreading from it,\
          which no one close by can look at without fear,\
          for Zeus\'92 lighting bolts fill men with terror\'97\
[490] that\'92s how mighty Hector fell down in the dust.                                  \
          His spear dropped from his hand. His shield fell on him,\
          his helmet, too. The finely worked bronze armour                                          \
          round his body rattled. Raising a loud shout,\
          Achaeans ran up, hoping to drag Hector back.\
          Their spears flew thick and fast, but no one could wound him,\
          that shepherd of his people, with sword or spear.\
          Before that happened, the best men rallied by him,\
          Polydamas, Aeneas, lord Agenor,\
          Lycian leader Sarpedon, and noble Glaucus.\
[500] None of the others ignored Hector. In front of him,                           \
          they held round shields. His companions picked him up\
          and took him in their arms out of the fighting,\
          until they came to his swift horses waiting for him                                          \
          with their charioteer and richly ornate chariot\
          behind the battle lines. With chariot and horses\
          they took Hector, groaning badly, towards the city.\
          But when they reached the ford on that lovely river,\
          the swirling Xanthus, whose father is immortal Zeus,\
          they lifted him out and set him on the ground.\
[510] They poured on water to revive him. His eyes opened.                       \
          He rose to his knees, but then vomited dark blood\
          and fell down on his back again, lying on the ground.\
          Black night was covering up his eyes, for his spirit\
          was still overpowered by that blow from Ajax.\
          \
          When Argives saw Hector carried back, they charged in,                                \
          going at Trojans even more, their battle fury roused.\
          Far ahead of all the rest came O\'eflean Ajax.\
          Jumping out with his sharp spear, he struck Satnius,\
          son of Enops, who\'92d conceived him with a Naiad nymph,\
[520] while he was tending cattle by the river banks                                    \
          at the Satnioeis. Ajax, son of O\'efleus,\
          famous spearman, came up and struck him in the side.\
          Satnius fell backwards. Trojans and Danaans\
          then fought on around him. Spearman Polydamas,\
          son of Panthous, came up to help. He threw and hit\
          Protho\'ebnor, son of Areilycus, in his right shoulder.                                         \
          The heavy spear tore through the shoulder. He fell down\'97\
          lying in the dust and clawing dirt. Polydamas,\
          with a great shout, exulted in his triumph:\
          \
[530] \'93I don\'92t think that spear flew in vain                                         \
          from the strong hand of Panthous\'92 valiant son.\
          Some Argive has got it in his flesh.\
          I think as he goes down to Hades\'92 house,\
          he\'92ll use it as a walking staff.\'94\
          \
          Polydamas\'92 loud boasting pained the Argives.\
          He especially roused the spirit in fierce Ajax,\
          son of Telamon. For Protho\'ebnor fell                                                               \
          right next to him. So Ajax quickly moved ahead\
          and hurled his shining spear. But jumping to one side,\
[540] Polydamas nimbly avoided his dark fate.                                             \
          The spear hit Archelochus, Antenor\'92s son\'97\
          the gods had planned his death. It struck his spine up high,\
          where the head attaches to the neck\'97slicing through,\
          it cut both sinews. As he fell, his head, mouth, and nose\
          hit the earth well before his knees, and Ajax cried\
          to brave Polydamas:\
          \
          \'93Consider this, Polydamas,                                          \
          and tell me the truth\'97is not this man here\
          worth killing to avenge Protho\'ebnor?\
          He doesn\'92t seem to be unworthy,\
[550] or from inferior parents. He looks like                                       \
          a brother of horse-taming Antenor,\
          perhaps his son\'97he looks a lot like him.\'94\
          \
          Ajax shouted this, knowing very well the man he\'92d killed.\
          Trojans hearts were seized with grief. Then Acamas,\
          standing above his brother\'92s body, with his spear\
          struck Promachus, a Boeotian, as he was trying\
          to drag Archelochus by his feet. Over the body\
          Acamas shouted then in triumph:\
          \
          \'93You Argive boasters,\
          how you love to threaten! Misery like this,\
[560] all this suffering, is not for us alone.                                                      \
          You too some day will be killed like this.\
          See how your Promachus now sleeps in death,\
          thanks to my spear. Whatever\'92s owed to me\
          for my brother has not been unpaid long.\
          That\'92s why in time of war a soldier prays\
          he leaves at home a brother to avenge him.\'94\
          \
          Acamas shouted this, bringing grief to Argives.\
          He really stirred the heart of warlike Peneleus.\
          He charged at Acamas, who did not stay there\
[570] to confront the charge of noble Peneleus,                                           \
          so he then struck Ilioneus, son of Phorbas,\
          who owned many flocks, a man whom Hermes loved                                     \
          above all Trojans, and he\'92d made him wealthy.\
          Ilioneus was the only child his mother bore\
          to Phorbas. But then he was hit by Peneleus,\
          below his eyebrows, just underneath his eye.\
          The spear knocked out the eyeball, went in his eye,\
          drove through his neck, and sliced the tendons at the nape.\
          Ilioneus collapsed, stretching out his arms.\
[580] Peneleus drew his sharp sword and struck his neck,                            \
          chopping head and helmet, so they hit the ground,\
          the spear still sticking from the socket of his eye.\
          Holding it up high, like a flowering poppy,\
          Peneleus shouted a loud boast at the Trojans:                                                 \
          \
          \'93Trojans, you can now tell the dear father\
          and mother of fine Ilioneus to lament\
          all through their house. When we Achaean lads\
          sail in our ships from Troy, then the wife\
          of this Promachus, son of Alegenor,\
[590] will not be celebrating the return                                                \
          of her beloved husband.\'94\
          \
          Peneleos finished.\
          The Trojans were shaken, limbs trembling. Every man\
          looked around to see how he could evade grim death.\
          \
          Tell me now, you Muses living on Olympus,\
          which of the Achaeans was first to carry off\
          bloody trophies from the men who\'92d just been slaughtered,\
          when famous Earthshaker turned the tides of war.                                         \
          The first for that was Ajax, son of Telamon.\
          He hit Hyrtius, the son of Gyrtius,\
[600] who led the courageous Mysians. Then Antilochus                             \
          stripped spoils from Mermerus and Phalces.\
          Meriones killed Morus and Hippotion,\
          while Teucer slaughtered Protho\'f6n and Periphetes.\
          and Menelaus hit Hyperenor in the side,\
          a shepherd to his people. As it went through him,\
          the spear forced out his guts. His life-spirit left him\
          through the wound, and darkness veiled his eyes.\
          But Ajax, swift son of O\'efleus, killed the most.                                                \
          For none could match his speed on foot, as he ran,             \
[610] chasing men in flight when Zeus forced them to flee.                         }