{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf460
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue0;}
\deftab720
\pard\tx0\pardeftab720\ri1920\sl440\sa266\qc

\f0\fs28 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Book Three\uc0\u8232 \'a0Paris, Menelaus, and Helen\
\pard\tx0\pardeftab720\ri1920\sl440\sa266
\cf2 \'97[The armies move together; Paris volunteers to fight Menelaus in single combat; both sides prepare make a truce; Iris visits Helen; Helen goes to the Scaean Gate, looks at the Achaean troops with Priam; Priam leaves Troy to visit the armies and administer the treaty oath; Agamemnon utters the prayer for the treaty; Paris and Menelaus fight in single combat; Aphrodite rescues Paris; Paris and Helen meet in Troy; Agamemnon demands compensation from the Trojans]\
Once troops had formed in ranks under their own leaders,\uc0\u8232 Trojans marched out, clamouring like birds, like cranes screeching overhead, when winter\'92s harsh storms drive them off,\u8232 screaming as they move over the flowing Ocean,\u8232 bearing death and destruction to the Pygmies,\u8232 launching their savage attack on them at dawn.*\u8232 Achaeans came on in silence, breathing ferocity,\u8232 determined to stand by each other in the fight.\u8232 Just as South Wind spreads mist around the mountain peak,  \'97[10]\u8232 something shepherds hate, but thieves prefer to night,  for one can see only a stone\'92s throw up ahead,\u8232 so, as men marched, dense dust clouds rose from underfoot.\u8232 They advanced at full speed out across the plain.\u8232 The two armies moved in close towards each other.\u8232 Then godlike Paris stepped out, as Trojan champion,\u8232 on his shoulders a leopard skin. He had bow and sword.\u8232 Brandishing two bronze-tipped spears, he challenged\u8232 the best men in the whole Achaean force to fight\'97\u8232 a single combat, to the death. War-loving Menelaus \'97[20]\u8232 noticed Alexander striding there, his troops  bunched up in ranks behind him, and he rejoiced,\u8232 like a famished lion finding a large carcass\'97\u8232 antlered stag or wild goat\'97and devouring it at once,\u8232 though fierce young hunters and swift dogs attack.*\u8232 So Menelaus was pleased to see Paris there,\u8232 right before his eyes. Menelaus had in mind\u8232 taking revenge on the man who\'92d injured him.\u8232 At once Menelaus jumped from his chariot,\u8232 down to the ground, his weapons in his fists.\u8232 When godlike Alexander saw Menelaus there,  \'97[30]\u8232 among the fighters at the front, his heart sank.\u8232 He moved back into the ranks, among his comrades,\u8232 avoiding death. Just as a man stumbles on a snake\u8232 in some mountainous ravine and gives way, jumping back,\u8232 his limbs trembling, his cheeks pale, so godlike Paris,\u8232 afraid of Atreus\'92 son, slid back into proud Trojan ranks.\u8232 Seeing this, Hector went at Alexander, insulting him:\
\'93Despicable Paris, handsomest of men,\uc0\u8232 but woman-mad seducer. How I wish\u8232 you never had been born or died unmarried. \'97[40]\u8232 That\'92s what I\'92d prefer, so much better\u8232 than to live in shame, hated by others.\u8232 Now long-haired Achaeans are mocking us,\u8232 saying we\'92ve put forward as a champion\u8232 one who looks good, but lacks a strong brave mind.\u8232 Was this what you were like back on that day\u8232 you gathered up your faithful comrades,\u8232 sailed sea-worthy ships across the ocean,\u8232 went out among a foreign people,\u8232 and carried back from that far-off land a lovely woman linked by marriage\u8232 to warrior spearmen, thus bringing on\u8232 great suffering for your father and your city, \'97[50]\u8232 all your people\'97joy to your enemies\u8232 and to yourself disgrace? And can you now\u8232 not face Menelaus? If so, you\'92d learn\u8232 the kind of man he is whose wife you took.\u8232 You\'92d get no help then from your lyre, long hair,\u8232 good looks\'97Aphrodite\'92s gifts\'97once face down,\u8232 lying in the dirt. Trojans must be timid men. \u8232 If not, for all the evil things you\'92ve done\u8232 by now you\'92d wear a garment made of stones.\'94\
To Hector godlike Alexander then replied: \'97[60]\
\'93Hector, you\'92re right in what you say against me.\uc0\u8232 Those complaints of yours are not unjustified.\u8232 Your heart is tireless, like a wood-chopping axe\u8232 wielded by a craftsman cutting timber for a ship.\u8232 The axe makes his force stronger. Your mind\'92s like that\'97\u8232 the spirit in your chest is fearless. But don\'92t blame me\u8232 for golden Aphrodite\'92s lovely gifts.  Men can\'92t reject fine presents from the gods,\u8232 those gifts they personally bestow on us,\u8232 though no man would take them of his own free will.\u8232 You want me now to go to battle.\u8232 Get others to sit down\'97Trojans and Achaeans.\u8232 Put me and war-loving Menelaus\u8232 in their midst to fight it out for Helen, \'97[70]\u8232 all her property. The one who triumphs,\u8232 comes off victorious, the better man,\u8232 let him take all the goods and lead her home, \u8232 as his wife. Let others swear a solemn oath,\u8232 as friends, either to live on in fertile Troy\u8232 or to return to horse-breeding Argos,\u8232 land of the lovely women of Achaea.\'94\
So Paris spoke. Hearing those words, Hector felt great joy.\uc0\u8232 He went to the middle ground, between the armies,\u8232 halted Trojan troops, grasping the centre of his spear shaft.\u8232 The men sat. But long-haired Achaeans kept on shooting,\u8232 attempting to hit Hector with rocks and arrows.  \'97[80]\u8232 Then Agamemnon, king of men, roared out at them: \'93Argives, Achaean lads, stop hurling things.\u8232 Hector of the flashing helmet wants to talk to us.\'94\
Once Agamemnon spoke, the men stopped fighting\uc0\u8232 quickly falling silent. Hector then addressed both sides:\
\'93You Trojans, you well-armed Achaeans,\uc0\u8232 listen now to what Paris has to say,\u8232 the man whose actions brought about our fight.\u8232 He bids the other Trojans, all Achaeans,\u8232 set their weapons on the fertile ground.\u8232 He and war-loving Menelaus here  \'97[90]\u8232 will fight it out alone between the armies\u8232 for Helen and for all her property.\u8232 Whichever one comes out victorious,\u8232 the stronger man, let him seize all the goods,\u8232 and take the woman as his wife back home.\u8232 Let others swear a solemn oath as friends.\'94\
So Hector spoke. The soldiers all grew silent.\uc0\u8232 Then Menelaus, loud in war, answered Hector:\
\'93Listen now to me. More than anyone,\uc0\u8232 my heart has suffered pain. So now I think  Argives and Trojans should part company,\u8232 since you have suffered many hardships,\u8232 thanks to the fight between myself and Paris,  \'97[100]\u8232 a fight that he began. Whichever one of us\u8232 death takes, our fate, let that man perish.\u8232 You others quickly go your separate ways.\u8232 So bring two lambs here\'97white male, black female\'97\u8232 for earth and sun. We\'92ll bring one more for Zeus.\u8232 Lead out great Priam to administer the oath\u8232 in person, for his sons are over-proud, \u8232 untrustworthy. No man should transgress\u8232 by violence oaths sworn in Zeus\'92 name.\u8232 Young men\'92s minds are fickle. An older man\u8232 who joins them thinks of past and future,\u8232 so with both groups things happen for the best.\'94  \'97[110]\
Achaeans and Trojans were elated, full of hope\uc0\u8232 that wretched war would end. They pulled the chariots back\u8232 into the ranks, climbed out, disarmed, and placed their weapons\u8232 next to each other on the ground, with little room\u8232 between both groups. Hector sent two heralds to the city,  to fetch the lambs with speed and summon Priam.\u8232 Agamemnon sent Talthybius to the hollow ships,\u8232 instructing him to bring a sacrificial lamb.\u8232 Talthybius obeyed god-like Agamemnon\'92s orders.  \'97[120]\
Then Iris came as messenger to white-armed Helen\uc0\u8232 taking on the image of her sister-in-law,\u8232 wife of Antenor\'92s son, fine Helicaon.\u8232 Her name was Laodice, of all Priam\'92s daughters\u8232 the most beautiful. She found Helen in her room,\u8232 weaving a large cloth, a double purple cloak,  creating pictures of the many battle scenes\u8232 between horse-taming Trojans and bronze-clad Achaeans,\u8232 wars they suffered for her sake at the hands of Ares.\u8232 Standing near by, swift-footed Iris said:  \'93Come here, dear girl, \'97[130]\u8232 Look at the amazing things going on.\u8232 Horse-taming Trojans and bronze-clad Achaeans,\u8232 men who earlier were fighting one another\u8232 in wretched war out there on the plain,\u8232 both keen for war\'92s destruction, are sitting still.\u8232 Alexander and war-loving Menelaus are going to fight for you with their long spears.\u8232 The man who triumphs will call you his dear wife.\'94\
With these words the goddess set in Helen\'92s heart\uc0\u8232 sweet longing for her former husband, city, parents.  \'97[140]\u8232 Covering herself with a white shawl, she left the house,\u8232 shedding tears. She did not go alone, but took with her\u8232 two attendants, Aethrae, daughter of Pittheus,\u8232 and ox-eyed Clymene. They soon reached the Scaean Gates.\u8232 Oucalegaon and Antenor, both prudent men,\u8232 elder statesmen, sat at the Scaean Gates, with Priam and his entourage\'97Panthous, Thymoetes,\u8232 Lampus, Clytius, and brave Hicataeon. Old men now,\u8232 their fighting days were finished, but they all spoke well.\u8232 They sat there, on the tower, these Trojan elders, \'97[150]\u8232 like cicadas perched up on a forest branch, chirping\u8232 soft, delicate sounds. Seeing Helen approach the tower,\u8232 they commented softly to each other\'97their words had wings:\
\'93There\'92s nothing shameful about the fact\uc0\u8232 that Trojans and well-armed Achaeans\u8232 have endured great suffering a long time over such a woman\'97just like a goddess,\u8232 immortal, awe-inspiring. She\'92s beautiful.\u8232 But nonetheless let her go back with the ships\u8232 Let her not stay here, a blight on us, our children.\'94 \'97[160]\
So they talked. Priam then called out to Helen.\
\'93Come here, dear child. Sit down in front of me,\uc0\u8232 so you can see your first husband, your friends,\u8232 your relatives. As far as I\'92m concerned,\u8232 it\'92s not your fault. For I blame the gods.\u8232 They drove me to wage this wretched war against Achaeans. Tell me, who\'92s that large man,\u8232 over there, that impressive, strong Achaean?\u8232 Others may be taller by a head than him,\u8232 but I\'92ve never seen with my own eyes,\u8232 such a striking man, so noble, so like a king.\'94 \'97[170]\
Then Helen, goddess among women, said to Priam:\
\'93My dear father-in-law, whom I respect and honour,\uc0\u8232 how I wish I\'92d chosen an evil death\u8232 when I came here with your son, leaving behind\u8232 my married home, companions, darling child, and friends my age. But things didn\'92t work that way.\u8232 So I weep all the time. But to answer you,\u8232 that man is wide-ruling Agamemnon,\u8232 son of Atreus, a good king, fine fighter,\u8232 and once he was my brother-in-law,\u8232 if that life was ever real. I\'92m such a whore.\'94 \'97[180]\
Priam gazed in wonder at Agamemnon, saying:\
\'93Son of Atreus, blessed by the gods, fortune\'92s child,\uc0\u8232 divinely favoured, many long-haired Achaeans\u8232 serve under you. Once I went to Phrygia,  that vine-rich land, where I saw Phrygian troops\u8232 with all their horses, thousands of them,\u8232 soldiers of Otreus, godlike Mygdon,\u8232 camped by the banks of the Sangarius river.\u8232 I was their ally, part of their army,\u8232 the day the Amazons, men\'92s peers in war,\u8232 came on against them. But those forces then\u8232 were fewer than these bright-eyed Achaeans.\'94  \'97[190]\
The old man then spied Odysseus and asked: \'a0\'93Dear child, come tell me who this man is, shorter by a head than Agamemnon,\uc0\u8232 son of Atreus. But he looks broader\u8232 in his shoulders and his chest. His armour\'92s stacked\u8232 there on the fertile earth, but he strides on,\u8232 marching through men\'92s ranks just like a ram\u8232 moving through large white multitudes of sheep.\u8232 Yes, a woolly ram, that\'92s what he seems to me.\'94\
Helen, child of Zeus, then answered Priam: \'93That man is Laertes\'92 son, crafty Odysseus, \'97[200]\uc0\u8232 raised in rocky Ithaca. He\'92s well versed  in all sorts of tricks, deceptive strategies.\'94\
At that point, wise Antenor said to Helen:\
\'93Lady, what you say is true. Once lord Odysseus\uc0\u8232 came here with war-loving Menelaus,\u8232 as an ambassador in your affairs.\u8232 I received them both in my residence\u8232 and entertained them. I got to know them\'97\u8232 from their appearance and their wise advice.\u8232 When they mingled with us Trojans\u8232 in our meeting and Menelaus rose,  \'97[210]\u8232 his broad shoulders were higher than the other\'92s.\u8232 But once they sat, Odysseus seemed more regal.\u8232 When the time came for them to speak to us,\u8232 setting out their thoughts quite formally,\u8232 Menelaus spoke with fluency\'97few words,\u8232 but very clear\'97no chatter, no digressions\'97\u8232 although he was the younger of the two.\u8232 But when wise Odysseus got up to speak,\u8232 he just stood, eyes downcast, staring at the ground.\u8232 He didn\'92t move the sceptre to and fro, but gripped it tightly, like some ignoramus\'97\u8232 a bumpkin or someone idiotic.\u8232 But when that great voice issued from his chest,  \'97[220]\u8232 with words like winter snowflakes, no man alive\u8232 could match Odysseus. We were no longer\u8232 disconcerted at witnessing his style.\'94\
Priam, the old man, saw a third figure, Ajax, and asked:\
\'93Who is that other man?\'a0\'a0He\'92s over there\'97\uc0\u8232 that huge, burly Achaean\'97his head and shoulders\u8232 tower over the Achaeans.\'94 Then Helen  long-robed goddess among women, answered:\
\'93That\'92s massive Ajax, Achaea\'92s bulwark.\uc0\u8232 Across from him stands Idomeneus,\u8232 surrounded by his Cretans, like a god.  \'97[230]\u8232 Around him there stand the Cretan leaders.\u8232 Often war-loving Menelaus welcomed him\u8232 in our house, whenever he arrived from Crete.\u8232 Now I see all the bright-eyed Achaeans\u8232 whom I know well, whose names I could recite.\u8232 But I can\'92t see two of the men\'92s leaders, Castor, tamer of horses, and Pollux,\u8232 the fine boxer\'97they are both my brothers,\u8232 whom my mother bore along with me.\u8232 Either they did not come with the contingent\u8232 from lovely Lacedaemon, or they sailed here\u8232 in their seaworthy ships, but have no wish \'97[240]\u8232 to join men\'92s battles, fearing the disgrace,\u8232 the many slurs, which are justly mine.\'94\
Helen spoke. But the life-nourishing earth\uc0\u8232 already held her brothers in Lacedaemon,  in their own dear native land.  Through Troy,\u8232 heralds brought offerings to seal the binding oaths,\u8232 two lambs and in a goatskin sack some sparkling wine,\u8232 fruit of the earth. Idaios, the herald, brought in\u8232 the gleaming mixing bowl and golden cups.\u8232 Standing close by Priam, he encouraged him. \'a0\'93Son of Laomedon, the leading officers \'97[250]\u8232 among horse-taming Trojans and bronze-clad Achaeans\u8232 are calling you to come down to the plain,\u8232 to administer their binding promises.  Paris and war-loving Menelaus\u8232 are going to fight it out with their long spears\u8232 over the woman. The man who wins,\u8232 who comes off the victor, gets the woman\u8232 and her property. The others will all swear\u8232 an oath of friendship, a binding one\'97\u8232 we will live in fertile Troy, they in Argos,\u8232 where horses breed, and in Achaea,\u8232 land of lovely women.\'94 Idaios finished.\u8232 The old man trembled, then ordered his attendants to prepare his chariot. They obeyed at once.  \'97[260]\u8232 Priam climbed in and pulled back on the reins.\u8232 Antenor climbed in the fine chariot beside him.\u8232 The two men led swift horses through the Scaean Gate,\u8232 out to the plain. Once they reached the Trojans and Achaeans,\u8232 they climbed out of the chariot onto fertile ground,\u8232 in the space between the Trojan and Achaean troops.\u8232 At once, Agamemnon and crafty Odysseus\u8232 stood up to greet them. Noble heralds fetched the offerings,\u8232 to ratify their solemn oaths pledged to the gods.  They prepared wine in the mixing bowl, then poured water\u8232 over the kings\'92 hands. Atreus\'92 son drew out the dagger  \'97[270]\u8232 which always hung beside his sword\'92s huge scabbard,\u8232 then sliced hairs off lambs\'92 heads. Attendants passed these hairs\u8232 among the leaders of the Trojans and Achaeans.\u8232 Raising his hands, Agamemnon then intoned\u8232 a mighty prayer on their behalf:  \'93Father Zeus,\u8232 ruling from Mount Ida, most glorious,\u8232 most powerful, and you, too, god of the sun,\u8232 who sees everything, hears everything, \u8232 you rivers, earth, you gods below the earth,\u8232 who punish the dead when men swear false oaths,\u8232 you gods are witnesses. Keep this oath firm. \'97[280]\u8232 If Alexander slays Menelaus,\u8232 let him keep Helen, all her property.\u8232 Let us return in our sea-worthy ships.\u8232 But if fair-haired Menelaus kills Alexander,\u8232 then let the Trojans hand back Helen,\u8232 with all her property, and compensate\u8232 Achaeans with something suitable,  which future ages will remember.\u8232 If Alexander\'92s killed and Priam\u8232 and Priam\'92s children are unwilling\u8232 to reimburse me, then I\'92ll remain here,\u8232 fight on until I\'92m fully satisfied,  \'97[290]\u8232 until I end this war appropriately.\'94\
So Agamemnon prayed. With his bronze dagger,\uc0\u8232 he slit the lambs\'92 throats, placed them on the ground,\u8232 gasping in their death throes as their life ebbed out,\u8232 their spirit sliced away by Agamemnon\'92s knife. Next from the mixing bowl, they drew off wine in cups,\u8232 poured out libations to the deathless gods.\u8232 Then Trojans and Achaeans all spoke out this prayer:\
\'93Most powerful, mighty Zeus, and you others,\uc0\u8232 you immortal gods, may you make sure\u8232 the men who first violate these oaths\u8232 will have their brains spill out onto the ground,\u8232 just like this wine, they and their children.  \'97[300]\u8232 May their wives be carried off by other men.\'94\
So they prayed. But the son of Cronos didn\'92t grant their wish.  Then Priam, descendant of Dardanus, addressed them all:\
\'93Hear me, you Trojans, you well-armed Achaeans.\uc0\u8232 I am returning now to windy Troy.\u8232 I have no wish to see with my own eyes\u8232 my dear son fight war-loving Menelaus.\u8232 Zeus and other immortal gods know well\u8232 which of them is fated to end up dead.\'94\
So Priam spoke. He placed the lambs in his chariot. \'97[310]\uc0\u8232 The god-like man climbed in, held back the reins.\u8232 Antenor climbed in the fine chariot by Priam.  Then both men set off, moving back toward Troy.\
Then Hector, Priam\'92s son, and lord Odysseus\uc0\u8232 first measured out the ground, took lots, and shook them up\u8232 in a bronze helmet, to see who\'92d throw his bronze spear first.\u8232 Then every Trojan and Achaean held up his hands,\u8232 praying to the gods: \'93Father Zeus, ruling from Mount Ida,  \'97[320]\u8232 mighty, all-powerful, of these two men,\u8232 let the one who brought this war to both sides\u8232 be killed and then go down to Hades\'92 house.\u8232 And grant our oath of friendship will hold firm.\'94  So they prayed. Hector of the flashing helmet\u8232 turned his eyes to one side and shook out the lots.\u8232 Alexander\'92s token fell out immediately.\u8232 The troops sat down in their respective places,\u8232 by their high-stepping horses and their inlaid armour.\u8232 Paris, husband to Helen with the lovely hair,\u8232 hoisted his fine armour on his shoulders. On his shins, \'97[330]\u8232 he clipped leg armour fitted with silver ankle clasps.\u8232 Then he put around his chest the body armour\u8232 belonging to his brother Lycaon. It fit him well. \u8232 On his shoulder he looped his bronze, silver-studded sword,\u8232 his huge strong shield. On his handsome head he put\u8232 a fine helmet with nodding horse-hair plumes on top,\u8232 full of menace. Then he picked out a brave spear\u8232 which fit his grip. Menelaus prepared himself as well.\u8232 When the two men, standing on each side with their troops, \'97[340]\u8232 had armed themselves, they strode out to the open space\u8232 between the Trojans and Achaeans, staring ferociously.\u8232 As horse-taming Trojans and well-armed Achaeans\u8232 gazed at the two men, they were overcome with wonder. The two men approached each other over measured ground,\u8232 brandishing their spears in mutual fury.\u8232 Alexander was the first to hurl his spear.\u8232 It struck Menelaus\'92 shield, a perfect circle,\u8232 but the bronze did not break through, the point deflected\u8232 by the powerful shield. Then Menelaus, Atreus\'92 son,\u8232 threw in his turn. First he made this prayer to Zeus: \'97[350]\
\'93Lord Zeus, grant I may be revenged on this man,\uc0\u8232 who first committed crimes against me,\u8232 lord Alexander. Let him die at my hands,  so generations of men yet to come\u8232 will dread doing wrong to anyone\u8232 who welcomes them into his home as friends.\'94\
Menelaus then drew back his long-shadowed spear,\uc0\u8232 and hurled it. It hit the son of Priam\'92s shield,\u8232 a perfect circle. The heavy spear pierced through it,\u8232 went straight through the fine body armour, through the shirt\u8232 which covered Alexander\'92s naked flesh.\u8232 But Paris twisted to the side, evading a black fate.  \'97[360]\u8232 Pulling out his silver-studded sword, the son of Atreus raised it and struck the crest of Paris\'92 helmet.\u8232 But the sword shattered into three or four pieces,\u8232 falling from his hand. The son of Atreus, in vexation,\u8232 looked up into wide heaven, crying out: \'93Father Zeus,\u8232 what god brings us more trouble than you do?\u8232 I thought I was paying Alexander\u8232 for his wickedness, but now my sword\u8232 has shattered in my fist, while from my hand\u8232 my spear has flown in vain. I haven\'92t hit him.\'94\
As Menelaus said these words, he sprang forward, grabbing the horse hair crest on Paris\'92 helmet,\uc0\u8232 twisting him around. He began dragging Paris off,\u8232 back in the direction of well-armed Achaeans.  \'97[370]\u8232 The fine leather strap stretched round Paris\'92 soft neck,\u8232 right below his chin, was strangling him to death.\u8232 At that point Menelaus would have hauled back Paris\u8232 and won unending fame, if Aphrodite, Zeus\'92 daughter,\u8232 had not had sharp eyes. Her force broke the ox-hide strap,\u8232 leaving Menelaus clutching in his massive hands\u8232 an empty helmet. Whipping it around, Menelaus hurled the helmet in among well-armed Achaeans.\u8232 His loyal companions retrieved it. He charged back,\u8232 with his bronze spear, intent on killing Alexander.\u8232 But Aphrodite had snatched Paris up\'97for a god \'97[380]\u8232 an easy feat\'97concealed him in a heavy mist,\u8232 and placed him in his own sweetly scented bedroom.\
Then Aphrodite went to summon Helen.\uc0\u8232 She found her on the high tower, in a crowd\u8232 among the Trojan women. She clutched Helen\u8232 by her perfumed dress, twitched it, then addressed her,  in the form of an old woman, a wool carder,\u8232 someone who used to live in Lacedaemon,\u8232 producing fine wool, a woman Helen really liked.\u8232 In this shape, divine Aphrodite spoke to Helen: \'a0\'93Alexander is asking you to come back home. \'97[390]\u8232 He\'92s in the bedroom, on the carved-out bed,\u8232 his beauty and his garments glistening.\u8232 You wouldn\'92t think he\'92s just come from some fight.\u8232 He looks as if he\'92s going to a dance,\u8232 or if he\'92s sitting down right after dancing.\'94 Aphrodite spoke, stirring emotion in Helen\'92s heart.\u8232 Noticing the goddess\'92 lovely neck, enticing breasts,\u8232 her glittering eyes, Helen was astonished.\
\'93Goddess, why do you wish to deceive me so?\uc0\u8232 Are you going to take me still further off,  \'97[400]\u8232 to some well-populated city somewhere\u8232 in Phrygia or beautiful Maeonia,\u8232 because you\'92re in love with some mortal man\u8232 and Menelaus has just beaten Paris\u8232 and wants to take me, a despised woman,  back home with him? Is that why you\'92re here,\u8232 you and that devious trickery of yours?\u8232 Why don\'92t you go with Paris by yourself,\u8232 stop walking around here like a goddess,\u8232 stop guiding your feet toward Olympus,\u8232 and lead a miserable life with him,\u8232 caring for him, until he makes you his wife \'97[410]\u8232 or slave. I won\'92t go to him in there\'97\u8232 that would be shameful, serving him in bed.\u8232 Every Trojan woman would revile me afterwards.  Besides, my heart is hurt enough already.\'94\
Divine Aphrodite, angry at Helen, answered her:\
\'93Don\'92t provoke me, you obstinate girl.\uc0\u8232 I might lose my temper, abandon you,\u8232 and hate you just as much as I have loved you.\u8232 I could make Trojans and Danaans hate you, too.\u8232 Then you\'92d suffer death in misery.\'94\
Aphrodite spoke. Helen, born from Zeus, was too afraid.\uc0\u8232 She covered herself in her soft white linen shawl,\u8232 went off in silence, unnoticed by all the Trojan women. With goddess Aphrodite in the lead,  \'97[420]\u8232 they came to Alexander\'92s lovely house.\u8232 There the attendants quickly set about their work.\u8232 Helen, goddess among women, went to her room upstairs,\u8232 where laughter-loving goddess Aphrodite\u8232 picked up a chair and carried it for Helen.\u8232 She placed it facing Paris. Helen, child of Zeus,\u8232 who bears the aegis, sat down. With eyes averted,\u8232 she began to criticize her husband: \'a0\'93You\'92ve come back from the fight. How I wish you\'92d died there, killed by that strong warrior\u8232 who was my husband once. You used to boast\u8232 you were stronger than warlike Menelaus, \'97[430]\u8232 more strength in your hands, more power in your spear.\u8232 So go now, challenge war-loving Menelaus\u8232 to fight again in single combat.\u8232 I\'92d suggest you stay away. Don\'92t fight it out\u8232 man to man with fair-haired Menelaus,\u8232 without further thought. You might well die,\u8232 come to a quick end on his spear.\'94  Replying to Helen, Paris said: \'a0Wife,\u8232 don\'92t mock my courage with your insults.\u8232 Yes, Menelaus has just defeated me,\u8232 but with Athena\'92s help. Next time I\'92ll beat him. \'97[440]\u8232 For we have gods on our side, too. But come,\u8232 let\'92s enjoy our love together on the bed.\u8232 Never has desire so filled my mind as now,\u8232 not even when I first took you away\u8232 from lovely Lacedaemon, sailing off\u8232 in our sea-worthy ships, or when I lay with you in our lover\'92s bed on the isle of Cranae.\u8232 That\'92s how sweet passion has seized hold of me,\u8232 how much I want you now.\'94  Paris finished speaking.\u8232 He led the way to bed. His wife went, too.\u8232 The two lay down together on the bed. \
Atreus\'92 son paced through the crowd, like a wild beast,\uc0\u8232 searching for some glimpse of godlike Alexander.  \'97[450]\u8232 But no Trojan nor any of their famous allies\u8232 could reveal Alexander to warlike Menelaus.\u8232 If they\'92d seen him, they had no desire to hide him.  For they all hated Paris, as they hated gloomy death.\u8232 Agamemnon, king of men, addressed them:\
\'93Listen to me, Trojans, Dardanians, allies\'97\uc0\u8232 victory clearly falls to war-loving Menelaus.\u8232 So give back Argive Helen and her property,\u8232 compensate us with a suitable amount,\u8232 something future ages will all talk about.\'94  \'97[460]\
As he finished speaking, the other Achaeans cheered.\
}