{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf460
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural\qc

\f0\fs24 \cf0 Book Sixteen\
Patroclus Fights and Dies\

\i \
[Patroclus begs Achilles to send him back to the war to help the Achaeans; Achilles agrees but sets conditions; Hector breaks Ajax's spear, sets fire to the ship; Achilles sends Patroclus to war with the Myrmidons; Patroclus arms himself, Achilles organizes the Myrmidons in fighting groups; Achilles prays to Zeus; Patroclus goes into battle, driving Trojans back from the ships; Trojans retreat; Sarpedon rallies the Lycians, fights Patroclus; death of Sarpedon; Apollo cures Glaucus' wound; the fight over Sarpedon's body; Trojans are driven back towards Troy, Hector kills Patroclus]
\i0 \
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural
\cf0           While the men kept on fighting at the well-decked ships,\
          Patroclus went to Achilles, his people\'92s shepherd,\
          shedding warm tears, like a fountain of dark water\
          whose stream flows over the lip of a sheer rock face.\
          Looking at him, swift-footed, godlike Achilles\
          felt pity. So he spoke to him\'97his words had wings:\
          \'93Why are you crying, Patroclus, like some girl,\
          an infant walking beside her mother,\
          asking to be picked up. She pulls the robe\
  [10] and stops her mother strolling on ahead,                                       \
          looking up at her in tears, until the mother                                               \
          lifts her up. You\'92re crying just like that girl,\
          Patroclus. Is there something you need to say\
          to the Myrmidons or me? Some news\
          from Phthia that only you have heard?\
          People say Menoetius, Actor\'92s son,\
          is still living, and Peleus is alive,\
          Aeacus\'92 son, among his Myrmidons.\
          If these two had died, then we\'92d have something\
  [20] real to grieve about. Or are you feeling sad                                    \
          for Argives as they\'92re being obliterated\
          among the hollow ships for all their pride?\
          Speak up. Don\'92t conceal what\'92s on your mind.      \
          Then we\'92ll both understand.\'94\
          \
          With a heavy sigh,\
          horseman Patroclus, you then replied:                                                                 \
          \
          \'93Achilles,\
          Peleus\'92 son, by far the strongest of Achaeans,\
          don\'92t be angry with me. Such great despair\
          has overcome the Argives. For all those\
          who used to be the bravest warriors\
  [30] are lying at the ships with sword and spear wounds\'97                 \
          powerful Diomedes, son of Tydeus,\
          hit by a spear, famous spearman Odysseus\
          with a stab wound, and Agamemnon, too.\
          An arrow struck Eurypylus in the thigh.\
          Many healers, exceptionally skilled\
          in various medicines, are with them now,\
          tending their wounds. But it\'92s impossible\
          to deal with you, Achilles. I hope anger\
          like this rage you\'92re nursing never seizes me.                                            \
[40] It\'92s disastrous! How will you be of use                                            \
          to anyone in later generations,\
          if you won\'92t keep shameful ruin from the Argives?\
          You\'92re pitiless. Perhaps horseman Peleus\
          was not your father, nor Thetis your mother\'97\
          the grey sea delivered you, some tall cliff,\
          for you\'92ve an unyielding heart. If your mind\
          shuns some prophecy, or your noble mother\
          has told you news from Zeus, at least send me,\
          and quickly, with the others in our troop\
  [50] of Myrmidons. I could be a saving light                                          \
          for the Danaans. Give me your armour                                                        \
          to buckle round my shoulders, so Trojans,\
          mistaking me for you, may stop the fight.\
          Then Achaea\'92s warrior sons could get some rest.\
          They\'92re worn out. War doesn\'92t offer much relief.\
          We\'92re fresh, so we should easily repulse\
          the Trojans tired of the battle noise\
          back from our ships and huts towards the city.\'94\
          Patroclus finished his entreaty. How wrong he was!\
  [60] He was praying for his own death, his dreadful fate.                              \
          Swift-footed Achilles, with some heat, replied:\
          \'93My dear divinely born Patroclus,\
          what are you saying? I\'92m not concerned\
          with any prophecy I know about,                                                                 \
          nor has my noble mother said a thing\
          from Zeus. But dreadful pain came in my heart\
          and spirit when that man wished to cheat\
          someone his equal and steal away that prize,\
          and just because he\'92s got more power.\
  [70] That really hurt, given that I\'92ve suffered                                         \
          in this war so many pains here in my chest.\
          Achaea\'92s sons chose that girl as my prize.\
          I won her with my spear, once I\'92d destroyed\
          her strong-walled city. Lord Agamemnon\
          took her back, out of my hands, as if I were\
          some stranger without honour. But let that be\'97                                      \
          it\'92s over, done with. Besides, my spirit\
          didn\'92t mean to stay enraged for ever,\
          although I thought I wouldn\'92t end my anger\
  [80] until the cries of warfare reached my ships.                                   \
          Come, put my famous armour on your shoulders\
          and lead war-loving Myrmidons to battle,\
          since black clouds of Trojans now surround the ships,\
          expecting victory, and Argives stand\
          crammed in by the sea shore, with little space,\
          while a city full of Trojans comes at them\
          without fear, because they don\'92t see near them                                         \
          my helmet with its glittering front. Soon enough,\
          they\'92d be running back, filling the gullies\
  [90] with their dead, if mighty Agamemnon                                           \
          treated me with kindness\'97but now they fight\
          all through our camp. For there\'92s no spear raging\
          in the fists of Diomedes, son of Tydeus,\
          to protect Danaans from disaster.\
          I\'92ve not heard the voice of Agamemnon\
          crying out in his vile head. As for Hector,\
          that man-killer\'92s voice echoes everywhere,           \
          shouting at Trojans, who fill all the plain\
          with their noise, as they defeat Achaeans\
[100] in this battle. Even so, Patroclus,                                                                \
          you must stave off disaster from the fleet.\
          Go after them in force\'97they may fire those ships\
          and rob us of the journey home we crave.\
          Now, pay attention to what I tell you\
          about the goal I have in mind for you,\
          so you\'92ll win me great honour and rewards,\
          so all Danaans will send back to me\
          that lovely girl and give fine gifts as well.\
          Once you push Trojans from the ships, come back.\
[110] If Zeus, Hera\'92s mate, who loves his thunder,                                  \
          gives you the glory, don\'92t keep on battling\
          those war-loving Trojans with me absent.                                                  \
          You would decrease my honours. Don\'92t let\
          the joy of fighting and of killing Trojans\
          lead you on to Ilion, just in case\
          some deathless Olympian god attacks you.\
          Apollo, the far-worker, loves his Trojans.\
          So make sure you come back here again,\
          once your saving light has reached our ships.\
[120] Let others keep on fighting in the plain.                                         \
          O Father Zeus, Athena, and Apollo\'97\
          if only no single Trojan or Achaean\
          could escape death, and just we two alone\
          were not destroyed, so that by ourselves\
          we could take Troy\'92s sacred battlements!\'94                                                  \
          As these two were talking on like this together,\
          Ajax was losing ground, under attack from spears,\
          overcome by the will of Zeus and Trojans,\
          who kept throwing weapons. The bright helmet on his head\
[130] rattled dangerously as it was struck. Many hits                                       \
          landed on the well-made armour on his cheeks.\
          His left shoulder was worn out from always holding up\
          his shining shield. But for all the onslaught with their spears,\
          the Trojans couldn\'92t budge him. Still, he was in trouble,\
          breathing heavily, sweat pouring down in rivulets        \
          from every limb. He\'92d had no time for any rest.                                                  \
          In every way, his desperate plight was getting worse.\
          Tell me now, you Muses living on Olympus,\
          how the fire first got tossed onto Achaean ships.\
[140] It was Hector. He came up close to Ajax,                                                 \
          then with his great sword hacked at Ajax\'92s ash spear,\
          right behind the point. He cut straight through it.\
          Telamonian Ajax still gripped the spear,\
          but it was useless without its bronze spear head,\
          which fell some distance off, clanging on the ground.\
          The heart in mighty Ajax recognized gods\'92 work.\
          He shuddered, for he perceived how high-thundering Zeus\
          was denying completely all his fighting skill,                                                      \
          wanting the Trojans to prevail. Ajax backed off,\
[150] out of range. Then onto that swift ship the Trojans threw                    \
          untiring fire, which spread itself immediately\
          in a fiery blaze that no one could extinguish.\
          The ship\'92s stern started to catch fire.\
          \
          At that moment,\
          Achilles, slapping his thighs, said to Patroclus:\
          \
          \'93Up now,\
          divinely born Patroclus, master horseman.\
          In the ships I see destructive flames going up.\
          Trojans must not seize our ships and leave us\
          with no way to escape. Put armour on\'97\
          and quickly. I\'92ll collect the soldiers.\'94\
[160] Achilles spoke. Patroclus dressed in gleaming bronze.                                     \
          First, he fixed on his shins the beautiful leg armour,\
          fitted with silver ankle clasps. Around his chest\
          he put on the body armour of Achilles,\
          swift-footed descendant of Aeacus\'97finely worked\
          and glittering like a star. On his shoulders he then slung\
          his bronze silver-studded sword and a large strong shield.\
          On his powerful head he set the famous helmet\
          with its horsehair crest. The plume on top nodded\
          full of menace. Then Patroclus took two strong spears\
[170] well fitted to his grip. He\'92d didn\'92t choose Achilles\'92 spear,                     \
          for no Achaean man could wield that weapon,\
          so heavy, huge, and strong, except for brave Achilles.                                       \
          It was made of ash wood from the peak of Pelion.\
          Cheiron gave it to Achilles\'92 father to kill warriors.\
          Patroclus told Automedon to yoke the horses quickly,\
          the man he most esteemed after Achilles,\
          breaker of men, and the one he trusted most\
          to carry out his orders in a battle.\
          For Patroclus Automedon put swift horses\
[180] in the harnesses, Xanthus and Balius, who flew along                           \
          as swiftly as the wind. These horses Podarge,\
          the harpy, had conceived with West Wind, as she grazed                                 \
          in a meadow beside the stream of Oceanus.*\
          In the side traces he set Pedasus in harness,\
          a fine horse Achilles had taken for himself,\
          when he\'92d captured the city of E\'ebtion.\
          Though mortal, it kept pace with his deathless horses.\
          Meanwhile Achilles went to and fro among the huts,\
          getting all his Myrmidons to arm themselves.\
[190] They rushed out, like flesh-eating wolves, hearts full                            \
          of unspeakable fury, beasts which in the mountains\
          have caught and ripped apart some huge antlered stag.\
          Then in a pack they charge off, jaws all dripping blood,                                    \
          to lap black surface water with their slender tongues\
          in some dark spring, vomiting up clots of blood\
          from their crammed bellies, while in their chests their hearts\
          are resolute. That\'92s how the leaders and commanders\
          of the Myrmidons rushed around brave Patroclus,\
          comrade of swift Achilles, Aeacus\'92 descendant,\
[200] who stood among them there, urging on the horses                              \
          and the warriors carrying their shields.   \
          Achilles had brought fifty ships to Troy\'97\
          in each were fifty men, his own companions.                                                      \
          He\'92d picked five leaders whom he trusted to give orders.\
          His great power gave him overall command.\
          The first contingent was led by Menesthius,\
          with his flashing breastplate, son of Spercheius,\
          the river fed from heaven. Lovely Polydora,\
          Peleus\'92 daughter, had conceived Menesthius\
[210] with timeless Spercheius, a woman copulating                                       \
          with a god. But in name Borus was his father,\
          son of Perieres, who\'92d married her in public,\
          after paying out a huge price for the bride.\
          The second group was led by warrior Eudorus,\
          a bastard child of Polymele, Phylus\'92 daughter,                                                            \
          a lovely dancer. The god who slaughtered Argus,\
          mighty Hermes, fell in love when he noticed her\
          among the singing maidens in the chorus\
          dancing for Artemis, the golden-arrowed goddess\
[220] in the echoing hunt. Hermes the helper,                                                  \
          going at once into her upper room in secret,\
          had sex with her. She bore him a fine son, Eudorus,\
          outstanding as a warrior and speedy runner.\
          But when Eileithyia, goddess of labour pains,\
          brought him into the light and he saw sunshine,\
          then strong Echecles, Actor\'92s son, took Polymele\
          to his home, after giving an enormous bride price.                                            \
          Old man Phylus was very kind to the young boy.\
          He looked after him, surrounding him with love,\
[230] as if he were his son. The third commander                                            \
          was warlike Peisander, son of Maemalus,\
          a man pre-eminent among the Myrmidons\
          for spear fighting, second only to Patroclus.\
          Phoenix led the fourth contingent, and Alcimedon,\
          splendid son of Laerces, was leader of the fifth.\
          Once Achilles had set all the ranks in order\
          behind their leaders, he addressed them sternly:\
          \'93My Myrmidons, let none of you forget                                                      \
          those threats you spoke about by our swift ships,\
[240] while I was angry\'97you\'92d go on and on                                           \
          against the Trojans. Each of you blamed me:\
          \'91Cruel son of Peleus, surely your mother\
          suckled you with bile, you pitiless man,\
          who keeps his comrades by their ships\
          against their will. Why don\'92t we go home\
          in our seaworthy ships, since evil rage\
          has fallen on your heart?\'92\
          \
          That\'92s what you men\
          complained about me in your meetings.\
          Now a great work of war awaits you,\
[250] the sort of enterprise you used to love.                                           \
          So make sure each man\'92s heart is resolute,\
          as you go to battle with these Trojans.\'94\
          With these words, Achilles stirred the spirit in each man.                                \
          As they heard their king, the ranks bunched up more closely.\
          Just as a man constructs a wall for some high house,\
          using well-fitted stones to keep out forceful winds,\
          that\'92s how close their helmets and bossed shields lined up,\
          shield pressing against shield, helmet against helmet,\
          man against man. On the bright ridges of the helmets,\
[260] horsehair plumes touched when warriors moved their heads.               \
          That\'92s how close they were to one another. In the front,\
          ahead of all of them, two men stood fully armed\'97\
          Automedon and Patroclus\'97sharing a single urge,\
          to fight in the forefront of their Myrmidons.                                                       \
          Achilles went into his hut and opened up the lid\
          on a beautifully decorated chest\
          placed on board his ship by silver-footed Thetis\
          for him to take. She\'92d packed it with cloaks and tunics,\
          and woollen blankets, too\'97protection from the wind.\
[270] There he kept an ornate goblet. Other than Achilles                             \
          no one used it to drink gleaming wine. With this cup\
          Achilles poured libations to no god but Father Zeus.\
          Taking this out of the chest, first he purified it\
          with sulphur, then rinsed it out in streams of water.\
          He washed his hands and drew some gleaming wine.                                        \
          Standing in the middle of the yard, he poured it out,\
          gazing up at heaven. Thunder-loving Zeus looked on.  \
          \'93Zeus, king, lord of Dodona, Pelasgian,\
          you who live far off, ruling cold Dodona,\
[280] around whom live the Selli, your prophets,                                    \
          with unwashed feet, who sleep upon the ground,\
          you heard me when I prayed to you before.\
          You gave me honour then by striking hard\
          at the Achaean army. So grant me now\
          what I still desire. I intend to stay\
          beside this group of ships, but I\'92m sending out\
          my comrade and my many Myrmidons.                                                      \
          Send glory with him, all-seeing Zeus.\
          Strengthen the heart inside his chest, so Hector\
[290] sees if Patroclus can fight on alone                                                  \
          or if his hands are always conquering\
          only when I\'92m with him in the raging war,\
          in the centre of the havoc Ares brings.\
          But when he\'92s pushed the fight and battle noise\
          back from the ships, let him return to me,\
          here at my hollow ships, without a scratch,\
          with all his weapons and companions,\
          men who battle in the killing zone.\'94\
          \
          So Achilles prayed.\
          Counsellor Zeus heard his prayer. He granted part of it,                                   \
[300] part he denied. Father Zeus agreed that Patroclus                                  \
          should drive the battle fighting from the ships,\
          but not that he\'92d return in safety from the war.\
          Once Achilles had made his libation and prayed\
          to Father Zeus, he went back into his hut,\
          put the goblet in the chest, came out, and stood there,\
          before his hut, still wishing in his heart\
          to see the fatal clash of Trojans and Achaeans.\
          The armed warriors who went with brave Patroclus\
          marched out in formation, until, with daring hearts,\
[310] they charged the Trojans, immediately swarming out,                          \
          like wasps beside a road, which young lads love to torment,                           \
          constantly disturbing them in their roadside nests\'97   \
          those fools make mischief for all sorts of people.\
          If some man going past along the road upsets them\
          by accident, they all swarm out with fearless hearts\
          to guard their young\'97with that same heart and spirit\
          the Myrmidons then poured out from their ships\
          with a ceaseless roar. In a loud shout, Patroclus\
          called out to his companions:\
          \'93You Myrmidons,\
[320] companions of Achilles, son of Peleus,                                            \
          be men, my friends, recall your fighting strength,                                     \
          so we may honour the son of Peleus,\
          by far the best Achaean at the ships,\
          with the finest comrades in a close combat.\
          Wide-ruling Agamemnon, Atreus\'92 son, will see\
          his folly in not honouring Achilles,\
          the best of the Achaeans.\'94\
          \
          With these words,\
          Patroclus spurred the strength and heart in every soldier.\
          Then, in a massed group, they fell upon the Trojans.\
[330] Terrifying cries came from Achaeans by their ships.                              \
          When Trojans saw the brave son of Menoetius\
          with his attendant, both in glittering armour,\
          all their hearts were shaken and their ranks fell back.                                       \
          They thought Peleus\'92 swift-footed son by his ships\
          had set aside his anger and made friends again.\
          Each man glanced around, checking how he might escape\
          his own complete destruction.\
          \
          Patroclus was the first\
          to throw his bright spear right at the central mass\
          where most troops clustered, by the stern part of the ship\
[340] of great-hearted Protesilaus. He hit a man,                                             \
          Pyraechmes, who\'92d led Paeonian charioteers\
          from Amydon, by the broad flowing Axius.\
          Struck by that spear in his right shoulder, he fell down\
          screaming on his back there in the dust. Comrades round him,                       \
          his Paeonians, ran off\'97Patroclus terrified them,\
          now he\'92d killed their leader and best fighter.\
          He drove them from the ships and doused the blazing fire.\
          The half-burnt ship he left there. The Trojans scattered,\
          making a tremendous noise. Danaans poured out\
[350] from among the ships throughout the constant uproar.                        \
          Just as from a high peak of some massive mountain,\
          Zeus, who gathers lightning, shifts a bulky cloud,\
          once more revealing all the peaks, high headlands,\
          and mountain glades, while from heaven the huge bright sky                         \
          breaks open\'97that\'92s how Danaans saved their ships\
          from fire and could rest, if only for a moment,\
          since the fighting was not over yet. At this point,\
          Achaean troops had not fully pushed the Trojans\
          from the ships. They\'92d been forced back from the sterns,\
[360] but they still stood there, facing the Achaeans.                                      \
          The leaders then began to slaughter one another\
          in the scattered fighting. First, Menoetius\'92 brave son\
          with his sharp spear struck Areilycus in the thigh,\
          as he was turning. He drove the bronze straight through,                                 \
          breaking the bone. Areilycus fell face down in the dirt.\
          Then warlike Menelaus hit Thoas in the chest,\
          in a place where it was open right beside his shield.\
          The blow collapsed his limbs. Meges, Phyleus\'92 son,\
          saw Amphiclus charging at him, but hit him first,\
[370] spearing the top of his leg, where a man\'92s muscle                                  \
          is the thickest. The spear point sliced his tendons,\
          and darkness closed his eyes. Then the sons of Nestor\
          went into action. Antilochus jabbed his sharp spear\
          at Atymnius, driving the bronze point in his side,\
          so he fell forward. Maris, who was close by,                                                             \
          angry about his brother, charged Antilochus\
          holding his spear, and then stood by his brother\'92s body.\
          But godlike Thrasymedes moved too quickly for him.\
          Before Maris could thrust, he lunged out at his shoulder.\
[380] He didn\'92t miss. The spear point sheared off muscle                               \
          at the bottom of his arm and broke the bone in two.\
          Maris fell with a crash, and darkness veiled his eyes.\
          Thus, these two, slaughtered by two brothers, went off\
          to Erebus. They\'92d been Sarpedon\'92s brave companions,\
          spearmen sons of Amisodarus\'97he\'92d reared\
          the raging Chimera, who\'92d killed so many men.*\
          Ajax, son of O\'efleus, jumped out at Cleobulus,                                                     \
          captured him alive, stuck in that confusion. Even so,\
          Ajax struck him with his sword across the neck,\
[390] draining his fighting strength. The sword grew warm with blood.       \
          Dark death closed up his eyes, and strong Fate embraced him.\
          Then Peneleus and Lycon charged each other.\
          Each had thrown his spear and missed, wasting the throw.\
          So they went at one another once again with swords.\
          Lycon struck the helmet ridge on its horse-hair crest,\
          but his sword shattered at the hilt. Then Peneleus\
          slashed Lycon\'92s neck below the ear. The sword bit deep,\
          sinking the entire blade, so Lycon\'92s head hung over,                                         \
          held up on one side only by the uncut skin.\
          His limbs gave way.\
          \
[400] Meriones, with quick strides,                               \
          caught up with Acamas, then hit him with his spear\
          in his right shoulder, as he was climbing in his chariot.\
          He tumbled out. A mist descended on his eyes.\
          Idomeneus\'92 pitiless bronze then struck Erymas\
          right in his mouth\'97the spear forced itself straight through,\
          below his brain, splitting his white skull apart,\
          smashing out his teeth. His eyes filled up with blood.\
          More blood spurted from his nose and open mouth.\
          Then death\'92s black cloud enveloped Erymas.                                                      \
[410] Thus these Danaan leaders each killed his man.                                     \
          Just as ravenous mountain wolves suddenly attack\
          young goats or lambs and seize them from the flock,\
          when in the mountains an inattentive shepherd\
          lets them wander off\'97once the wolves see them,\
          they attack at once, for those young lack the heart to fight\'97\
          that\'92s how Danaans then went after Trojans,\
          whose minds now turned to shameful flight, for they\'92d lost\
          their will to battle on.\
          \
          Great Ajax kept on trying\
          to throw his spear at bronze-armed Hector.\
[420] But Hector\'92s battle skills kept his broad shoulders hidden                            \
          behind his bull\'92s hide shield, as he watched arrows\
          and thudding spears flying past. Hector realized\
          the tide of victory in that fight was changing,\
          but he stood there, trying to save his loyal companions.\
          Just as those times a cloud comes from Olympus,\
          moving from the upper air across the sky,\
          when Zeus brings on a rain storm\'97that\'92s how Trojans\
          fled yelling from the ships, crossing the ditch again\
          in complete disorder. Hector\'92s swift-footed horses\
[430] carried him and his weapons back, leaving behind,                                \
          against their will, the Trojans held up at the trench\
          dug by Achaeans. In that ditch many swift horses                                              \
          lost their master\'92s chariots when poles snapped at the end.\
          In pursuit, Patroclus, intent on killing Trojans,\
          yelled fierce orders to Danaans. Meanwhile, the Trojans,\
          shouting and scattering in panic, were jammed up\
          in every pathway. Under the clouds a high dust storm rose,\
          as sure-footed horses strained to get away,\
          leaving the huts and ships and rushing for the city.\
[440] Wherever Patroclus saw the biggest crowd                                              \
          of soldiers in retreat, with a yell he charged at them.\
          Bodies kept rolling underneath his axle,\
          as men fell out when chariot cars rolled over.\
          His swift horses, those immortal beasts the gods gave                                     \
          as a priceless gift to Peleus, flew straight on\
          across the ditch, charging forward. Patroclus\'92 heart\
          was set on finding Hector, eager to strike him down.\
          But Hector\'92s own swift horses carried him away.\
          Just as in late summer rainstorms, the dark earth\
[450] is all beaten down, when Zeus pours out his waters                              \
          with utmost violence, when he\'92s enraged with men\
          who have provoked him with their crooked judgments,\
          corrupting their assemblies and driving justice out,\
          not thinking of gods\'92 vengeance, so all the rivers                                               \
          crest in flood, their torrents carving many hillsides,\
          as they roar down from the mountains in a headlong rush\
          toward the purple sea, destroying the works of men\'97\
          that\'92s how, as they sped on, the Trojan horses screamed.\
          When Patroclus had cut the Trojans\'92 front ranks off,\
[460] he pushed them back again towards the ships,                                       \
          keeping them from the city they were trying to reach.\
          Between the ships, the river, and the lofty wall,\
          in that middle ground, he kept charging at them,\
          killing them, avenging deaths of many comrades.\
          There he first struck Pronous with his shining spear,\
          where Pronous\'92 shield had left his chest exposed.                                              \
          His limbs gave way, and he fell down with a thud.\
          Patroclus next rushed at Thestor, son of Enops,\
          who just sat crouching in his polished chariot,\
[470] paralyzed with terror, reins slipping from his hands.                             \
          Coming up, Patroclus struck him with his spear\
          right on the jawbone, smashing through his teeth.\
          Patroclus pulled his spear back, dragging Thestor\
          out across the chariot rail. Just as a man\
          sitting on a rocky point hauls up a monstrous fish\
          out of the sea, using a line and bright bronze hook\'97\
          that\'92s how Patroclus dragged Thestor from his chariot,\
          mouth skewered on the shining spear. He threw him down,\
          face first. As Thestor fell, his spirit abandoned him.                                         \
[480] Then Erylaus rushed up, but Patroclus struck him                                 \
          with a rock right on his head, smashing the entire skull\
          inside his heavy helmet. Erylaus collapsed\
          face down in the dirt.\
          \
          Death, who destroys men\'92s hearts,\
          flowed all around Patroclus, as he slaughtered\
          Erymas, Amphoterus, Epaltes,\
          Tlepolemus, son of Damastor, Echius,\
          Pyris, Ipheus, Euippus, and Polymelus,\
          son of Argeas\'97all these Patroclus laid out,\
          one by one, on the earth, which nourishes all men.\
[490] When Sarpedon observed his Lycian companions,                                 \
          who wear no belt around their tunics, being cut down\
          by the hands of Menoetius\'92 son Patroclus,                                                           \
          he called out to reprimand his godlike Lycians:\
          \'93Shame on you Lycians! Where are you running?\
          Now\'92s the time for you to fight on bravely.\
          I\'92ll stand up to this man, so I\'92ll find out\
          who it is that fights so well, who brings with him\
          so much destruction for the Trojans,\
          breaking the limbs of many fearless soldiers.\'94\
[500] Sarpedon finished. He jumped out of his chariot                                    \
          down to the ground holding his weapons. On the other side,\
          when Patroclus saw him, he leapt from his chariot.\
          Then they rushed at each other, screaming like vultures\
          fighting with hooked talons and curved beaks, screeching                               \
          on some rocky height.\
          \
          Looking down on the two men,\
          the son of crooked-minded Cronos pitied them.\
          He spoke to Hera, his sister and his wife:\
          \'93Alas\'97Sarpedon, dearest of all men,\
          is fated now to die, killed by Patroclus,\
[510] son of Menoetius. My heart\'92s divided,                                             \
          as I think this over. Should I snatch him up\
          while still alive and place him somewhere else,\
          in his rich land of Lycia, far distant\
          from this wretched fighting, or have him killed\
          at the hands of Menoetius\'92 son.\'94\
          Ox-eyed queen Hera then replied to Zeus:\
          \
          \'93Dread son of Cronos,                                                     \
          how can you say this? The man is mortal,\
          doomed long ago by Fate. Now you desire\
          to rescue him from miserable death.\
[520] Do as you wish. But we other gods                                                  \
          will not all agree with you. And I\'92ll tell you\
          something else\'97make sure you remember it.\
          If you send Sarpedon home alive,\
          take care some other god does not desire\
          to send his dear son from the killing zone.\
          Around Priam\'92s great city, many men,\
          sons of the immortals, are now fighting.\
          You\'92ll enrage those gods and make them bitter.\
          But if Sarpedon\'92s dear to you, if your heart                                                 \
[530] feels pity for him, then let him be killed                                         \
          in a fierce combat at Patroclus\'92 hands,\
          son of Menoetius. Once his living spirit\
          has abandoned him, send Death and sweet Sleep\
          to carry him away, back to the spacious land\
          of Lycia, where his brother and his kinsmen\
          will bury him with a mound and headstone.\
          That\'92s what appropriate for those who die.\'94\
          Hera spoke. The father of gods and men agreed.\
          But he shed blood rain down upon the ground, tribute\
[540] to his dear son Patroclus was about to kill                                                        \
          in fertile Troy, far from his native land.\
          The two approached within range of each other.\
          Patroclus threw and struck renowned Thrasymelus,\
          lord Sarpedon\'92s brave attendant, low in the gut.\
          His limbs gave way. Then Sarpedon charged Patroclus.\
          His bright spear missed him, but it struck a horse,\
          Pedasus, in its right shoulder. The horse screamed,\
          gasping for life, then fell down in the dust, moaning\
          as the spirit left him. The two other horses reared,                                            \
[550] their yoke cracked, and their reins got intertwined                                \
          with the trace horse Pedasus lying in the dust.\
          But famous spearman Automedon cleared the tangle.\
          Pulling out the long sword on his powerful thigh,\
          he dashed in and, without a pause, cut the trace horse loose.\
          The two other horses straightened out, then pulled\
          together in their harness. The two men kept going,\
          taking up again their heart-destroying combat.\
          Once more Sarpedon failed with his bright spear. Its bronze point\
          sailed past Patroclus\'92 left shoulder, missing him.\
[560] Then Patroclus, in his turn, threw his bronze spear,                              \
          which did not leave his hand in vain. It struck                                                    \
          right between Sarpedon\'92s midriff and his beating heart.\
          Sarpedon toppled over, as an oak tree falls,\
          or poplar or tall mountain pine which craftsmen cut\
          with sharpened axes, to harvest timber for a ship\'97\
          that\'92s how he lay there stretched out before his chariot\
          and horses, groaning and clawing at the bloody dust.\
          Just as a lion moves into a herd, then kills a bull,\
          a sleek great-hearted steer among the shambling cattle,\
[570] which bellows as it dies right in the lion\'92s jaws\'97                                  \
          that\'92s how Sarpedon, leader of the Lycian spearmen,                                         \
          struggled as he died, calling to his dear companion:\
          \'93Glaucus, my friend, you warrior among men,\
          now you must really show yourself a spearman,\
          a true courageous fighter. You must now\
          embrace this evil war, if you\'92re brave enough.\
          First, move round and urge the Lycian leaders\
          to make a stand here by Sarpedon. And then,\
          you fight over me in person with your bronze.\
[580] I\'92ll be a source of misery to you,                                                       \
          and shame as well, for all your days to come,\
          if Achaeans strip my armour now I\'92m down                                               \
          among the fleet of ships. So hold your ground\
          with force. Spur on the army.\'94\
          \
          As he said this,\
          death\'92s final end covered Sarpedon\'92s eyes and nostrils.\
          Then Patroclus set his foot upon Sarpedon\'92s chest,\
          pulled his spear out of the body. The guts came with it.\
          So in the same moment he tugged out the spear point\
          and took Sarpedon\'92s life. Myrmidons reined in the horses,\
[590] snorting in their eagerness to bolt, now they\'92d left                                \
          their master\'92s chariot.\
          \
          When Glaucus heard Sarpedon\'92s voice,\
          he was overcome with savage grief, his heart dismayed\
          that he could not have come to his assistance.\
          With his hand he grabbed and squeezed his wounded arm,                             \
          still painful from being hit by Teucer\'92s arrow,\
          as he\'92d attacked him on that high defensive wall.\
          Teucer had been defending his companions\
          from disaster. So Glaucus prayed then to Apollo:\
          \'93Hear me, my lord. You may be in Lycia,\
[600] somewhere in that rich land, or here in Troy.                                \
          But you can hear a man\'92s distress from anywhere.\
          Bitter grief has now come in my heart.\
          For I have this cruel wound. Sharp pains\
          run up and down my arm, the flow of blood\
          won\'92t stop. The wound wears out my shoulder,\
          so I can\'92t grip my spear with any force,                                                        \
          or move to fight against our enemies.\
          And our finest man has perished\'97Sarpedon,\
          child of Zeus, who would not assist his son.\
[610] But, my lord, heal my savage wound at least,                                \
          and ease my pain. Give me strength, so I can call\
          my Lycian comrades, urge them on to war,\
          and I can fight in person by the corpse\
          of our Sarpedon now he\'92s dead.\'94\
          \
          So Glaucus spoke in prayer.\
          Phoebus Apollo heard him. He eased the pains at once,\
          stopped the dark blood flowing from the cruel wound,\
          and filled his chest with fighting strength. In his heart\
          Glaucus recognized with joy that the great god                                                  \
          had quickly heard his prayer. First, he moved around\
[620] and spurred on Lycia\'92s leading men in every spot                                   \
          to rally round Sarpedon. Then, with long strides,\
          he went among the Trojans\'97to Polydamas,\
          son of Panthous, and brave Agenor. He searched out\
          Aeneas and Hector dressed in bronze. Approaching him,\
          he spoke\'97his words had wings:\
          \
          \'93Hector,\
          now you\'92re neglecting all your allies,                      \
          men who for your sake are far away from friends,\
          their native land, wasting their lives away.\
          You\'92ve no desire to bring assistance.                                                           \
[630] Sarpedon, leader of Lycian spearmen,                                             \
          lies dead, the man who protected Lycia\
          with his judgment and his power\'97slaughtered\
          by Ares on the bronze spear of Patroclus.\
          My friends, stand by him, keep in your hearts\
          your sense of shame, in case the Myrmidons\
          strip off his armour and mutilate his corpse,\
          in their anger at the dead Danaans,\
          the ones killed by our spears at their fast ships.\'94\
          Glaucus finished. Trojans were completely overwhelmed\
[640] with grief\'97unendurable and inconsolable.                                             \
          For Sarpedon had always fought to guard their city,\
          although he was a distant stranger. Many soldiers                                             \
          followed him, and he was pre-eminent in war.\
          Full of furious passion, they went at Danaans,\
          Hector in the lead, angry about Sarpedon.\
          But Patroclus, Menoetius\'92 son, with his strong heart,\
          rallied the Achaeans. He spoke first to the Ajaxes,\
          both eager for the fight:\
          \
          \'93You two Ajaxes,\
          now you must get your joy protecting us,\
[650] as you\'92ve done before, but even better.                                           \
          The man who was the first to jump inside\
          Achaea\'92s wall lies dead\'97Sarpedon.\
          We must try to mutilate the body,\
          to seize and strip armour off its shoulders,                                                \
          slaughtering with our pitiless bronze         \
          any of his comrades who defend him.\'94\
          Patroclus spoke. The Ajaxes both were fiercely eager\
          to fight off the enemy in person. Then both sides\
          reinforced their ranks\'97Trojans and Lycians,\
[660] Achaeans and Myrmidons. These forces struggled,                                \
          with terrific shouts across the dead man\'92s corpse.\
          The warriors\'92 armour rang out harshly. Then Zeus,\
          to make the fight for his dear son more difficult,\
          spread ominous darkness over that fierce battle.\
          At first the Trojans pushed bright-eyed Achaeans back,\
          for they hit a man who was by no means the worst                                            \
          among the Myrmidons\'97noble Epeigeus,\
          son of great-hearted Agacles. He\'92d once been king\
          of populous Boudeum, but he\'92d killed a man,\
[670] a noble relative. So he came a suppliant                                                  \
          to Peleus and silver-footed Thetis, who\'92d sent him\
          to follow man-destroying Achilles, to sail with him\
          to Troy and fight the Trojans. Glorious Hector\
          struck him as he grabbed the corpse\'97with a rock\
          he hit his head and split the skull completely open\
          inside his heavy helmet. Epeigeus collapsed,\
          face down on the corpse. Death, who destroys men\'92s hearts,                           \
          flowed over him.\
          \
          Grief for his dead companion\
          filled Patroclus. He moved through those fighting in the front,\
[680] like a swift hawk swooping down on daws or starlings.                        \
          That\'92s how fast, Patroclus, master horseman, you charged\
          the Lycians and Trojans then, with anger in your heart\
          for your companion. With a rock he hit Sthenelaus,\
          dear son of Ithaemenes, squarely in the neck,\
          snapping the tendons. Those fighting in the ranks in front,\
          including glorious Hector, moved back somewhat,\
          as far as a long javelin flies when it\'92s been thrown\
          by a man in competition showing off his strength,                                             \
          or in a battle with a murderous enemy\'97\
[690] that\'92s how far Achaeans forced the Trojans to move back.                    \
          Glaucus, leader of the Lycian spearmen, was the first\
          to turn around. He killed great-hearted Bathycles,\
          Chalcon\'92s dear son, who lived at home in Hellas,\
          a man pre-eminent among the Myrmidons\
          for a wealthy and successful life. With his spear,\
          Glaucus turned suddenly, as Bathycles came up\
          in pursuit, then struck him in the middle of his chest.\
          He fell down with a crash. Achaeans felt keen sorrow\
          that such a worthy man had fallen. But Trojans,                                                 \
[700] elated, gathered in a crowd to make a stand                                           \
          around him. Achaeans did not forget their courage\'97\
          they brought their fighting spirit to the Trojans.\
          Meriones killed a well-armed Trojan warrior,\
          Laogonus, daring son of Onetor, a priest\
          of Zeus at Ida, honoured by his people like a god.\
          Meriones threw and hit him underneath the jaw.\
          His spirit swiftly left his limbs, and he was carried off\
          by hateful darkness. Then Aeneas, hoping\
          to hit Meriones as he advanced under his shield,\
[710] threw his bronze spear at him. But Meriones,                                         \
          looking right at Aeneas, evaded that bronze spear                                             \
          by bending forward. The long spear impaled itself\
          behind him in the ground, its shaft still quivering,\
          until strong Ares took away its power.\
          With anger in his heart, Aeneas then called out:\
          \'93Meriones, you\'92re a lovely dancer,\
          but if my spear had hit you, your dancing days\
          would have ended for all time to come.\'94\
          Famous spearman Meriones then replied:\
          \
          \'93Aeneas,\
[720] you may be brave, but it\'92s hard for you                                                      \
          to crush the fighting strength of every man\
          who stands to defend himself against you.\
          For you, too, are made of mortal stuff.\
          If I threw, if my bronze spear hit you\
          in the middle of your body, then no matter\
          what your courage, or how much trust you place\
          in your strong hands, you\'92d quickly give me glory,\
          and your life to famous horseman Hades.\'94\
          Meriones spoke. But then Menoetius\'92 noble son\
          reprimanded him:\
          \
[730] \'93Meriones, why do you,                                             \
          an honourable man, talk on like this?\
          My friend, Trojans won\'92t move back from the corpse\
          because someone abuses them with words.\
          They won\'92t budge until the earth holds many men.\
          Our task here is to battle with our hands.                                                 \
          The assembly is the place for speeches.\
          We don\'92t need more talk. We need to fight.\'94\
          Saying this, Patroclus led off, and Meriones,\
          that godlike man, went too. Then the turmoil started\'97\
[740] just like the din woodcutters make in mountain forests,                      \
          a noise heard far away\'97that\'92s how it sounded then,\
          the clamour rising from the widely travelled earth,\
          a clash of bronze and leather, well-made ox-hide shields,\
          as they fought there with two-edged spears and swords.\
          Not even a man who knew Sarpedon very well\
          could recognize him then, covered with blood and dirt\
          and weapons, from the soles of his feet up to his head.                                     \
          For men were swarming round the corpse like farmyard flies\
          clustering by buckets full of milk in springtime,\
[750] when milk overflows the pails\'97that how those warriors                     \
          buzzed around Sarpedon then.\
          \
          Zeus\'92 bright eyes never once\
          glanced from that brutal combat, gazing down\
          and thinking in his heart of many different things\
          about how lord Patroclus ought to meet his death,\
          wondering whether glorious Hector should cut him down                               \
          with his bronze in that bitter fighting there\
          over godlike Sarpedon and then strip the armour\
          from his shoulders, or whether he should multiply\
          grim misery for still more men. As Zeus pondered,\
[760] he thought the best plan would be to let Patroclus,                               \
          brave companion of Achilles, son of Peleus,\
          drive the Trojans and bronze-armed Hector back again\
          towards their city, destroying the lives of many men.\
          So Zeus first took the courage out of Hector\'92s heart,\
          so that he jumped into his chariot and turned in flight,\
          calling to other Trojans to run back, for he knew\
          that Zeus\'92 sacred scales were changing. The Lycians,\
          though brave, did not hold their ground. They all fled back,\
          once they\'92d seen their king struck through the heart, lying there                    \
[770] in the pile of bodies. Many men had fallen down                                   \
          on top of him, when Cronos\'92 son intensified\
          fierce conflict. So the Achaeans stripped Sarpedon,\
          pulling the gleaming bronze from off his shoulders.\
          Menoetius\'92 brave son gave it to his companions\
          to carry to the hollow ships. At that moment,\
          cloud-gatherer Zeus spoke to Apollo:\
          \
          \'93Up now,\
          dear Phoebus, and move Sarpedon out of range.\
          When you\'92ve cleaned the dark blood off his body,\
          take him somewhere far away and wash him\
[780] in a flowing river. Next, anoint him                                                 \
          with ambrosia, and put immortal clothes                                                   \
          around him. Then you must hand him over\
          to those swift messengers Sleep and Death,\
          twin brothers, to carry off with them.\
          They\'92ll quickly place him in his own rich land,\
          wide Lycia, where his brothers and kinsmen\
          will bury him with mound and headstone,\
          as is appropriate for those who\'92ve died.\'94\
          Zeus finished. Apollo did not disobey his father.\
[790] Descending from Mount Ida to that lethal war,                                      \
          he carried lord Sarpedon quickly out of range.\
          Once he\'92d taken him a long way off, he washed him\
          in a flowing river. Next, he anointed him\
          with ambrosia and put immortal clothing round him.                                       \
          Then Apollo gave Sarpedon up to Sleep and Death,\
          swift messengers, twin brothers, to take with them.\
          They quickly set him down in spacious Lycia,\
          his own rich land.\
          \
          Patroclus then called to his horses\
          and to Automedon to pursue the Trojans,\
[800] the Lycians, as well. How blind he was, poor fool!                                 \
          If he\'92d done what the son of Peleus had told him,\
          he\'92d have missed his evil fate, his own dark death.\
          But Zeus\'92 mind is always stronger than a man\'92s.\
          He can make even a brave man fearful, rob him\
          of his victory with ease. And Zeus can rouse a man\
          for battle, as he did then, putting desire to fight                                                \
          into Patroclus\'92 chest.\
          \
          Who was the first warrior you killed,\
          Patroclus, and who the last, that time the gods\
          called you on to death? Adrestus was the first,\
[810] then Autonous, Echeclus, Perimus, son of Megas,                                  \
          Epistor, and Melanippus. Then Patroclus killed\
          Elasus, Mulius, and Pylantes. The other Trojans,\
          each and every one of them, set their minds on flight.\
          At that point Achaea\'92s sons would have captured Troy\
          and its high gates, at Patroclus\'92 hands, as he raged\
          with his frenzied spear, but for Phoebus Apollo,                                                \
          who stood there on the well-built wall, intending\
          to destroy Patroclus and assist the Trojans.\
          Three times Patroclus started to climb up a corner\
[820] on that high wall. Three times Apollo shoved him back,                      \
          his immortal hands repelling the bright shield.\
          But when Patroclus, for the fourth time, came on\
          like some god, Apollo, with a terrific cry,\
          shouted these winged words at him:\
          \
          \'93Go back,\
          divinely born Patroclus. This city\
          of proud Trojans, according to its fate,\
          will not be ravaged by your spear, nor even\
          by Achilles, a far better man than you.\'94\
          Apollo spoke. Patroclus drew back a little,                                                          \
[830] evading the anger of Apollo, the far shooter.                                           \
          Meanwhile, Hector pulled his sure-footed horses up   \
          beside the Scaean Gate, uncertain what to do\'97\
          drive back to the confusion and then battle on,\
          or tell his soldiers to gather there inside the walls.\
          As he was thinking, Phoebus Apollo approached\
          in the form of Asius, a strong young man,\
          horse-taming Hector\'92s uncle, Hecuba\'92s blood brother,\
          Dymas\'92 son, who lived by the river Sangarius\
          in Phrygia. In that shape, Apollo, Zeus\'92 son,                                                        \
          spoke out:\
          \
[840] \'93Hector, why withdraw from battle?                                        \
          That\'92s not worthy of you. I wish I were\
          more powerful than you, as much as you\'92re\
          superior to me. Then you\'92d quickly leave\
          this battle in disgrace. But come on,\
          drive your strong-footed horses at Patroclus,\
          so you can kill him, and then Apollo\
          can give you glory.\'94\
          \
          Saying these words, Apollo left,\
          a god among the toiling men. Glorious Hector\
          then told fiery Cebriones to lash the horses on,\
[850] drive them to battle. Apollo slipped into the throng                             \
          of fighting men. He totally confused the Argives,\
          conferring glory on Hector and his Trojans.                                                                  \
          The rest of the Danaans Hector left alone,\
          not killing any of them. His sure-footed horses\
          were heading at Patroclus, who, for his part,\
          jumped down from his chariot to the ground, holding a spear\
          in his left hand. In his right hand, he gripped a stone,\
          a large jagged rock, his fingers wrapped around it.\
          Taking a firm stance, he went for Hector right away.\
[860] He threw the rock and didn\'92t waste his throw\'97he hit                          \
          Cebriones, Hector\'92s charioteer, a bastard son\
          of famous Priam, as he held onto the reins.\
          The sharp rock struck him on the forehead, bashing in\
          his eyebrows, breaking through the skull. His two eyes                                    \
          dropped down onto the ground, in the dust right at his feet.\
          Like a diver, Cebriones toppled over,\
          out of the well-made chariot. His spirit left his bones.\
          Then, horseman Patroclus, you made fun of him:\
          \
          \'93Well now,\
          there\'92s an agile man! What a graceful diver!\
[870] If he were on the fish-filled seas somewhere,                                 \
          he\'92d feed a lot of men by catching oysters,\
          jumping over in the roughest water,\
          judging from that easy dive he made\
          out of his chariot onto the plain. I suppose\
          these Trojans must have acrobats as well.\'94                                                \
          This said, Patroclus rushed at warrior Cebriones,\
          moving like a lion who, while savaging some farm,\
          is hit in the chest, so his own courage kills him.\
          That\'92s how you, Patroclus, rushed at Cebriones,\
[880] in your killing frenzy. Opposing him, Hector                                          \
          leapt from his chariot down to the ground. The two men        \
          then battled over Cebriones, like two lions\
          struggling on a mountain peak over a slaughtered deer,\
          both ravenous, both filled with fighting fury\'97\
          that\'92s how those two masters of the war shout fought,\
          Patroclus, Menoetius\'92 son, and glorious Hector,                                                 \
          over Cebriones, both keen to slash each other\'92s flesh\
          with pitiless bronze. Hector grabbed the corpse\'92s head,\
          refusing to let go. At the other end, Patroclus\
[890] gripped the feet. A desperate struggle then ensued                                \
          among the Trojans and Danaans fighting there.\
          Just as East and South Winds challenge one another\
          in mountain forests, shaking up deep stands of oak,\
          ash, and tapering cornel trees, hurling slim branches\
          one against the other, with tremendous noise\
          as the branches snap\'97that\'92s how Trojans and Achaeans                                  \
          collided with each other in that conflict.\
          Neither side had any thought of ruinous flight.\
          Around Cebriones many spears were driven home,\
[900] many winged arrows flew from bowstrings, many boulders                 \
          crashed on shields, as men kept fighting round him.\
          But the great man Cebriones, proud of his glory,\
          just lay there in the swirling dust, his horsemanship\
          now quite forgotten.\
          \
          As long as the sun kept moving through\
          the middle sky, weapons from both sides found their mark\'97\
          men kept on dying. But when the sun came to the point\
          which shows the time has come to unyoke oxen,\
          then Achaeans, contravening Fate, were stronger.                                              \
          They dragged warrior Cebriones out of range,\
[910] away from shouting Trojans, and stripped the armour                          \
          off his shoulders. Then Patroclus charged the Trojans,\
          intent on slaughter. Three times he assaulted them,\
          like war god Ares, with terrific shouts. Three times\
          he killed nine men. But when he attacked a fourth time,\
          then, Patroclus, you saw your life end. For Phoebus,\
          a terrible god, in that grim fight came up against you.\
          Patroclus failed to see Apollo, as he moved\
          through the confusion, for he advanced towards him                                        \
          hidden in thick mist. Apollo stood behind him.\
[920] Then with the flat of his hand, he struck Patroclus                                \
          on his back, on his broad shoulders\'97that made his eyes\
          lose focus. Next, Phoebus Apollo knocked the helmet\
          from his head. The horsehair crest rolled with a clatter\
          under horses\'92 feet. The dust and blood then stained\
          the helmet\'92s plumes. Up to that time, gods had not let\
          that helmet with its horsehair plume get smudged with dirt,\
          for it was always guarding godlike Achilles\'92 head,\
          his noble forehead, too. Later Zeus awarded it\
          to Hector to carry on his head, as his death loomed.                                         \
[930] In Patroclus\'92 hands, his heavy long-shadowed spear,                             \
          thick and strong, with its bronze point, was completely smashed.\
          His tasselled shield and strap fell from his shoulders\
          down on the ground. Next, Apollo, Zeus\'92 son, loosened\
          the body armour on Patroclus. His mind went blank,\
          his fine limbs grew limp\'97he stood there in a daze.\
          From close behind, Euphorbus, son of Panthous,\
          a Dardan warrior, hit him in the back,\
          with a sharp spear between the shoulder blades.\
          Euphorbus surpassed all men the same age as him\
          in spear throwing, horsemanship, and speed on foot.\
[940] He\'92d already knocked twenty men out of their chariots,                                 \
          and that was the first time he\'92d come with his own chariot\
          to learn something of war. Euphorbus was the first\
          to strike you, horseman Patroclus, but he failed\
          to kill you. Pulling the spear out of Patroclus\'92 flesh,\
          Euphorbus ran back again to blend in with the throng.\
          He didn\'92t stand his ground, even though Patroclus\
          had no weapons for a fight. So Patroclus,\
          overwhelmed by the god\'92s blow and spear, withdrew,\
          back to the group of his companions, avoiding death.\
[950] But when Hector noticed brave Patroclus going back,                           \
          wounded by sharp bronze, he moved up through the ranks,\
          stood close to Patroclus and struck him with his spear,                                    \
          low in the stomach, driving the bronze straight through.\
          Patroclus fell with a crash, and Achaea\'92s army\
          was filled with anguish. Just as a lion overcomes\
          a tireless wild boar in combat, when both beasts\
          fight bravely in the mountains over a small spring\
          where they both want to drink, and the lion\'92s strength\
          brings down the panting boar\'97that\'92s how Hector,\
[960] moving close in with his spear, destroyed the life                                  \
          of Menoetius\'92 noble son, who\'92d killed so many men.\
          Then Hector spoke winged words of triumph over him:\
          \'93Patroclus, you thought you\'92d raze our city,                                               \
          robbing our women of their life of freedom,\
          taking them in ships to your dear native land.\
          You fool! In front of them, Hector\'92s horses,\
          swift of foot, came out to fight. With the spear\
          I\'92m the very best war-loving Trojan,\
          and I\'92ve saved them from their fatal day.\
[970] Now vultures will eat you here. You poor wretch,                        \
          even Achilles, for all his courage,\
          was no use to you. Though he stayed behind,\
          he must have given you strict orders as you left,\
          \'91Don\'92t return to me, horseman Patroclus,\
          at the hollow ships, until you\'92ve slashed blood                                      \
          all over man-killing Hector\'92s tunic\
          from his own chest.\'92\
          \
          That\'92s what he must have said\
          to win you over to such foolishness.\'94\
          Then you, horseman Patroclus, your strength all gone,\
          replied:\
          \
[980] \'93Boast on, Hector, for the moment.                                         \
          Zeus, son of Cronos, and Apollo\
          have given you victory. They overcame me\
          easily, for they personally removed\
          the armour from my shoulders. If twenty men\
          came to confront me, just like you,\
          all would have died, slaughtered by my spear.\
          But deadly Fate and Leto\'92s son have slain me\'97\
          and Euphorbus. So you\'92re the third in line                                                 \
          at my death. But I\'92ll tell you something else\'97\
[990] bear this in mind\'97you\'92ll not live long yourself.                            \
          Your death is already standing close at hand,\
          a fatal power. For you\'92ll be destroyed\
          at brave Achilles\'92 hands, descendant of Aeacus.\'94\
          As Patroclus said these words to Hector,\
          the finality of death flowed over him.\
          His spirit fluttered from his limbs and went to Hades,\
          lamenting its own fate, the loss of youthful manhood.\
          As Patroclus died, splendid Hector spoke to him:\
          \'93Patroclus, why predict my own death for me?\
[1000] Who knows? It may happen that Achilles,                                               \
          son of fair-haired Thetis, is hit first\
          by a spear of mine and gives up his life.\'94\
          As he said this, Hector set his foot down on the corpse,\
          pulled the bronze spear from the wound, and pushed the body\
          backwards. Then with that spear he set off at once,\
          going after Automedon, godlike attendant\
          to the swift-footed kinsman of Aeacus,\
          eager to strike at him. But he\'92d been carried off\
          by those swift immortal horses, the priceless gift\
          presented by the gods to Peleus.}