{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf460
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural\qc

\f0\fs24 \cf0 Book Seventeen\
The Fight Over Patroclus         \
 \

\i [The men fight over the body of Patroclus; the exploits of Menelaus in that fight; Apollo rouses Hector to attack, Menelaus retreats; Ajax and Menelaus then move up over the body; Glaucus upbraids Hector; Hector attacks again, with Zeus' support; the battle goes back and forth over the body; Zeus spreads fog over the battle field; Apollo rouses Aeneas to fight; the horses of Achilles mourn Patroclus, refusing to move; Automedon takes them into battle with Zeus' help; Hector and Aeneas go after Achilles' horses, but are pushed back; Athena rouses Menelaus to fight on; Apollo does the same for Hector; Achaeans are driven back; Zeus lifts the fog from the battle; Menelaus goes to Antilochus, tells him to give Achilles the news of Patroclus' death; the Achaeans move off with the body of Patroclus, back towards the ships]
\i0 \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural
\cf0           \
           \
          In that battle, warlike Menelaus, son of Atreus,\
          noticed that the Trojans had just killed Patroclus.\
          Dressed in gleaming armour, he strode through the ranks\
          of those fighting in the front, then made a stand\
          over the corpse, like a mother beside her calf,\
          lowing over her first born, with no experience\
          of giving birth till then. In just that way,\
          fair-haired Menelaus stood above Patroclus.\
          In front of him he held his spear and a round shield,\
  [10] eager to kill anyone who might come at him.                                         \
          But Euphorbus, son of Panthous, with his ash spear,\
          also knew that brave Patroclus had been killed.                                                 \
          Moving up close to the dead body, he spoke out,\
          addressing warlike Menelaus:\
          \
          \'93Divinely raised Menelaus, son of Atreus,\
          leader of men\'97go back. Leave this corpse.\
          Abandon these battle trophies. No Trojan\
          and no famous ally hit Patroclus\
          before I struck him with my spear\
  [20] in that murderous fight. So let the Trojans                                     \
          give me the honour and the fame. If not,\
          I\'92ll steal your sweet life with one spear throw.\'94\
          \
          With a great scowl, fair-haired Menelaus then replied:\
          \
          \'93By Father Zeus, such arrogant boasting\
          has no great merit. The spirit in a leopard,                                                 \
          lion, or ferocious boar, whose chest\
          contains the fiercest and the strongest fury\'97\
          none of these, it seems, can match the arrogance\
          in sons of Panthous with their long ash spears.\
  [30] But not even horse-taming Hyperenor,                                           \
          strong as he was, got much enjoyment\
          from his youthful vigour, once he\'92d mocked me,\
          as he waited when I came against him,\
          calling me the most unworthy warrior\
          among Danaans. I don\'92t think he went home\
          to cheer up his dear wife and worthy parents\
          on his own two feet. So if you stand here\
          against me, I\'92ll drain your strength as well,\
          just as I did his. In fact, I\'92d advise you                                                          \
  [40] to retreat, get back to your companions.                                        \
          Don\'92t oppose me, in case you run into\
          something unwelcome. From experience\
          there are lessons even fools can learn.\'94\
          \
          Menelaus spoke,\
          but he failed to sway Euphorbus, who replied:\
          \
          \'93Now, indeed, divinely raised Menelaus,\
          you\'92ll surely make up for my brother\'92s death,\
          Hyperenor, whom you killed. You speak\
          in triumph about widowing his wife\
          in her new bridal home, bringing sorrow,\
  [50] grief beyond enduring, to his parents.                                             \
          I may provide them with a way of easing\
          their sad misery, if I bring home your head\
          and armour and toss them in the hands\
          of Panthous and queen Phrontis. In any case,                                             \
          we won\'92t delay our struggle long. Let\'92s start\'97\
          fight on, whether for victory or flight.\'94\
          \
          Saying this, Euphorbus struck Menelaus\'92 round shield.\
          But the bronze did not break through. The powerful shield\
          bent back the point. Then Menelaus, Atreus\'92 son,\
  [60] praying to Father Zeus, charged in clutching his spear,                         \
          as Euphorbus was moving back. He struck him\
          at the bottom of his throat, putting his full weight\
          behind the blow, with confidence in his strong fists.\
          The spear point drove straight through Euphorbus\'92 soft neck.\
          He fell with a thud, his armour clanging round him.                                          \
          His hair, as lovely as the fine curls on the Graces,\
          with braids in gold and silver clips, was soaked in blood.\
          Just as a man tends a flourishing olive shoot,\
          in some lonely place with a rich source of water,\
  [70] a lovely vigorous sapling stirred with the motion                                  \
          of every breeze, so it bursts out in white blossoms\'97\
          but then a sudden stormy wind arising rips it\
          from its trench and lays it out prone on the earth\'97\
          that\'92s how Menelaus, son of Atreus, cut down\
          Panthous\'92 son, Euphorbus of the fine ash spear.\
          He then began to strip the armour off.                                                                 \
          \
          Just as a mountain lion, trusting its own strength,\
          snatches the finest heifer from a grazing herd,\
          seizing her first by the neck in its powerful jaws,\
  [80] then breaks the neck and savagely rips that cow apart,                         \
          gorging itself on blood and all the entrails,\
          while around it dogs and herdsmen cry out in distress,\
          again and again, but at a distance, unwilling\
          to confront the beast, pale in the grip of fear\'97\
          in just that way, no Trojan\'92s heart was brave enough\
          to move up and fight against fine Menelaus.\
          Then Atreus\'92 son would have easily carried off                                                   \
          the celebrated armour of the son of Panthous,\
          if Phoebus Apollo had not been offended.\
  [90] He urged Hector, swift Ares\'92 equal, to challenge                                    \
          Menelaus. Taking on the likeness of a man,\
          Mentes, leader of the Cicones, Apollo\
          addressed Hector with these winged words:\
          \
          \'93Hector,\
          now you\'92re going after something you\'92ll not catch,\
          chasing the horses of warrior Achilles,\
          descendant of Aeacus. No mortal man,\
          except Achilles, can control or drive them,\
          for an immortal mother gave him birth.\
          Meanwhile, warrior Menelaus, Atreus\'92 son,\
[100] standing by Patroclus, has just killed                                              \
          the best man of the Trojans, Euphorbus,                                                     \
          son of Panthous, ending his brave fight.\'94\
          \
          With these words, Apollo withdrew again, a god\
          among the toiling men. A bitter cloud of sorrow\
          darkened Hector\'92s heart. Looking through the ranks of men,\
          he quickly noticed Menelaus stripping off\
          the famous armour, with Euphorbus on the ground,\
          lying there, blood flowing from his open wound.\
          Armed in his gleaming bronze, Hector marched ahead\
[110] through those fighting in the front, with a piercing shout,                    \
          like the inextinguishable fires of Hephaestus.\
          Hearing that penetrating yell, Atreus\'92 son\
          grew worried. He spoke to his courageous heart:                                               \
          \
          \'93Here\'92s trouble. If I leave this fine armour\
          and Patroclus, who lies here because he tried\
          to avenge my honour, some Danaan,\
          seeing this, will call me a disgrace.\
          But if I fight Hector and his Trojans\
          all by myself out of a sense of shame,\
[120] then they\'92ll surround me\'97many warriors                                      \
          against one man. Hector\'92s gleaming helmet\
          is bringing all the Trojans straight at me.\
          But why\'92s my fond heart debating about this?\
          When a man wants to cross what gods have willed,\
          fighting a man the gods are honouring,\
          then some disaster soon rolls over him.\
          So none of the Danaans seeing me here                                                      \
          moving back from Hector will find that shameful,\
          seeing that Hector fights with gods\'92 assistance.\
[130] But if I could find Ajax, skilled in war shouts,                                \
          the two of us, drawing on our fighting strength,\
          might come back, even against god\'92s will,\
          so we could find a way to save this corpse,\
          for Achilles\'92 sake, the son of Peleus.\
          In this bad situation, that\'92s what\'92s best.\'94\
          \
          As Menelaus thought these matters over\
          in his mind and heart, the Trojan ranks moved forward,\
          with Hector in the lead. Menelaus then backed off,\
          leaving the corpse behind. He kept looking round,\
[140] like a bearded lion which dogs and men chase off\'97                                         \
          their spears and shouts drive it from the farm. The beast\'92s heart,\
          though brave, grows cold, moving from that farmyard\
          against its will\'97that\'92s how fair-haired Menelaus\
          backed off from Patroclus. He turned round, standing firm,\
          once he\'92d reached the company of his companions.\
          He looked for mighty Ajax, son of Telamon,\
          and soon observed him on the left flank of the army,\
          rallying his companions, urging them to fight.\
          For Phoebus Apollo had made them all fall back\
[150] in an amazing panic. Going off on the run,                                               \
          Menelaus came up to Ajax, then spoke out:\
          \
          \'93Ajax, my friend, come here. Let\'92s hurry over                                             \
          to defend the dead Patroclus. Let\'92s see whether,\
          for Achilles\'92 sake, we can at least retrieve\
          the naked corpse. Hector with his bright helmet\
          already has the armour.\'94\
          \
          Menelaus spoke,\
          rousing the heart in warlike Ajax, who moved up\
          among those fighting in the front. With him went\
          fair-haired Menelaus. Once Hector had stripped off\
[160] the famous armour from Patroclus, he then tried                                   \
          to drag away the body, so with his sharp bronze\
          he could hack Patroclus\'92 head from off its shoulders,\
          then pull back the corpse to give to Trojan dogs.\
          But Ajax moved in close with his shield up, like a wall.           \
          So Hector gave ground, withdrawing to the company\
          of his companions, then jumped up in his chariot.                                             \
          He gave the splendid armour to some Trojans\
          to carry to the city, something that would bring him\
          special glory. Ajax then covered Menoetius\'92 son\
[170] with his broad shield and made his stand there, like a lion                  \
          over its cubs, a beast which hunters run across\
          in the forest as it leads its young along.\
          The lion shows off its power and contracts its brows\
          into fine slits which conceal its eyes\'97that\'92s how Ajax\
          defended warrior Patroclus. With him there,\
          on the other side, stood war-loving Menelaus,\
          son of Atreus, heart filled with utmost sorrow.\
          \
          Then Glaucus, son of Hippolochus, commander                                                 \
          of the Lycians, looking at Hector with a frown,\
          criticized him harshly:\
          \
[180] \'93Hector, to look at you,                                   \
          you\'92re the finest man we\'92ve got, but in battle\
          you\'92re sadly lacking. That fame you have\
          as a courageous warrior is misplaced.\
          You\'92re a man who runs away. Consider now,\
          how are you going to save your city\
          only with those soldiers born in Ilion?\
          For no Lycian will set out to fight\
          against Danaans for your city\'92s sake,\
          since there\'92s apparently no gratitude\
[190] for taking on our enemies without a rest.                                       \
          How can you rescue a lesser warrior\
          from the thick of battle, ungrateful man,                                                    \
          when Sarpedon, once your companion,\
          your guest, you abandon to the Argives,\
          to become their battle spoils, their trophy.\
          He often served you well\'97both your city\
          and you personally, while he was alive.\
          But now you lack the courage to protect him\
          from the dogs. So now, if any Lycian man\
[200] will listen to me, we\'92ll go home, and Troy                                      \
          will witness its utter devastation.\
          If Trojans now could fill themselves with courage,\
          a resolute and dauntless spirit, the sort\
          men have when they defend their native land,\
          struggling hard against a hostile army,\
          then we\'92d haul Patroclus back to Ilion\
          at once. If we pulled him from the battle                                                    \
          and brought the corpse to Priam\'92s mighty city,\
          Argives would quickly trade the lovely armour\
[210] belonging to Sarpedon, and we could then                                     \
          take his body back to Troy. Their dead man\
          attended on the greatest of the Argives,\
          who leads the best spear fighters by their ships.\
          But you don\'92t dare stand up to Ajax\
          in the thick of battle, look that brave warrior\
          in the eye, or confront him one on one,\
          since he\'92s a better man than you.\'94\
          \
          Hector of the gleaming helmet, looking angry, then replied:\
          \
          \'93Glaucus, why would a man like you speak out                                         \
[220] so arrogantly? My friend, I thought you had                                   \
          a better mind than any other man\
          living in fertile Lycia. But now,\
          on the basis of what you\'92ve just said,\
          I find your thinking questionable.\
          You say I didn\'92t stand to fight great Ajax.\
          I\'92m not afraid of war, the din of chariots,\
          but there\'92s always something more powerful,\
          the mind of Zeus, who bears the aegis.\
          Zeus makes even brave men run away,\
[230] stealing their victory with ease, or in person                                 \
          rouses men to fight. But come, my friend,\
          stand here beside me. Look at what I do,\
          whether I\'92m a coward all day long,                                                               \
          as you allege, or whether I\'92ll prevent\
          Danaans, for all their fighting frenzy,\
          from defending dead Patroclus.\'94\
          \
          Hector spoke.\
          Then, with a great shout, he called out to his Trojans:\
          \
          \'93Trojans, Lycians, Dardan spearmen,\
          be men, my friends. Recall your battle fury,\
[240] until I can put on the lovely armour                                                \
          of great Achilles, which I stripped off\
          the great Patroclus, once I\'92d killed him.\'94\
          \
          With these words, Hector of the shining helmet\
          left that furious conflict and strode quickly off\
          with rapid strides, following his companions,                                                     \
          the men taking the famous armour of Achilles\
          towards the city. He caught them a short distance off.\
          Then, standing apart from that dreadful fight,\
          he changed his armour. He gave his own equipment\
[250] to war-loving Trojans to carry to the city,                                                \
          sacred Ilion, then put on the immortal armour\
          of Achilles, son of Peleus, which heavenly gods\
          had given to Achilles\'92 well-loved father.\
          Once he\'92d grown old, Peleus gave it to his son,\
          who, for all his father\'92s armour, did not reach old age.\
          \
          From far away, cloud-gatherer Zeus gazed down on Hector,\
          as he dressed himself in the battle armour\
          of Peleus\'92 godlike son. Shaking his head, Zeus                                                    \
          then spoke to his own heart:\
          \
          \'93You poor wretch,\
[260] you\'92re not considering your own death at all\'97                             \
          it\'92s getting closer. So you\'92re putting on\
          the immortal armour of the finest man,\
          who makes other men afraid. You\'92ve just killed\
          his comrade, a kind, courageous man,\
          and then vainly stripped the armour off\
          his head and shoulders. But for the moment,\
          I\'92ll give you great power, to compensate you,\
          since you\'92ll not be coming back from battle,\
          or handing over to Andromache\
[270] the glorious armour of the son of Peleus.\'94                                      \
          \
          The son of Cronos spoke, then nodded his dark brow.\
          He changed the armour so it suited Hector\'92s body.                                            \
          Then the fearful war god Ares entered Hector,\
          filling his limbs with strength and courage. He set off,\
          to the tremendous shouts of all his famous allies,\
          as he paraded there in front of them, dazzling them all\
          with the armour of the great-hearted son of Peleus.\
          Hector moved around with words of encouragement\
          to everyone\'97Mesthles, Glaucus, Medon,\
[280] Thersilochus, Asteropaeus, Deisenor,                                                       \
          Hippothous, Phorcys, Chroraius, and Ennomus,\
          who read omens found in birds. Hector urged them on\'97\
          his words had wings:\
          \
          \'93Listen to me,\
          you countless tribes of allies, you neighbours.                                          \
          I called you here, each from your own city,\
          not because I wished a large display\
          or needed it, but so you might help me\
          rescue Trojan wives and little children\
          from warrior Achaeans. With this in mind,\
[290] I squander the resources of my people,                                           \
          with food supplies and presents, to strengthen\
          hearts in each of you. So now let everyone\
          turn round and face the enemy directly,\
          whether to survive or die. For in that choice\
          we find the joy which we derive from war.\
          Patroclus is dead, but whoever pulls him\
          to horse-taming Trojans here and makes Ajax                                           \
          move away\'97I\'92ll give him half the spoils,\
          keeping the other half myself, and he\'92ll get\
[300] a share of glory equal to my own.\'94                                                   \
          \
          Hector finished. Trojans then threw their full weight\
          straight at the Danaans, holding spears up high,\
          their hearts hoping they would drag that body\
          away from Ajax, son of Telamon. What fools!\
          By that corpse Ajax took many of their lives.\
          \
          Then Ajax said to Menelaus, skilled at war shouts:\
          \
          \'93Divinely reared Menelaus, my friend,\
          I don\'92t expect we two will be returning\
          from this battle. I\'92m not concerned so much\
[310] about Patroclus\'92 corpse, which soon enough                                             \
          will be food for Trojan dogs and birds,\
          but I fear for my own head, and yours, as well,\
          which may be in danger. Hector\'92s become\
          a war cloud which envelops everything.\
          And our complete destruction\'92s plain to see.\
          So come, call out to Achaea\'92s finest men.\
          One of them may hear.\'94\
          \
          Ajax finished.\
          Menelaus, skilled at war shouts, followed his advice.\
          He shouted to Danaans with a piercing yell:\
          \
[320] \'93Friends, rulers and leaders of Achaeans,                                         \
          all you who drink your wine at public cost\
          with Agamemnon and Menelaus,                                                                 \
          sons of Atreus, all you who rule your people,       \
          to whom Zeus has given honour and glory,\
           it\'92s difficult for me to see precisely\
          what each of you is doing\'97this conflict\
          rages on so fiercely. But all of you\
          must come here, even if not called by name,\
          for you\'92ll feel shame and anger in your hearts,\
[330] if Patroclus should become a toy                                                      \
          for Trojan dogs to play with.\'94\
          \
          Menelaus stopped.\
          Swift Ajax, son of O\'efleus, heard him clearly.\
          He was the first to come running through the battle\
          to meet Menelaus. After him came others\'97\
          Idomeneus and his companion Meriones,\
          the man-killing war god\'92s equal, and others, too.\
          But what man has a mind which could name all those                                      \
          who came up behind these warriors in that conflict\
          to reinforce Achaeans?\
          \
          Trojans then drove forward\
[340] in a single group with Hector leading them.                                            \
          Just as a huge wave roars into a flowing stream\
          at the mouth of a river fed from heaven,\
          with headlands on both sides of the shoreline\
          echoing the boom of salt water surf beyond\'97\
          that\'92s how Trojans roared as they came on in attack.\
          Achaeans held firm around Menoetius\'92 son,\
          united by a common spirit, behind a fence\
          of their bronze shields. The son of Cronos\
          cast a thick mist down on their glittering helmets,\
[350] for Zeus had not felt hostile to Patroclus                                                            \
          in earlier days, when he was alive and comrade\
          to Achilles. So Zeus did not want Patroclus\
          to become merely a plaything for the dogs\
          of his Trojan enemies. Thus, he encouraged\
          Patroclus\'92 companions to defend him there.\
          At first the Trojans drove bright-eyed Achaeans back,\
          so they retreated from the body, leaving it behind.\
          But the Trojans, though confident with their long spears,\
          did not kill anyone, for all their eagerness.\
[360] Still, they did begin to drag away the body.                                             \
          But the Achaean pull back was only temporary,\
          for Ajax quickly rallied them. Of all Danaans\
          he was the finest in his looks and actions                                                            \
          after the son of Peleus. Ajax strode around\
          through those fighting in the front, like a mountain boar\
          who scatters dogs and strong young men with ease,\
          as it wheels through forest clearings\'97that\'92s how Ajax,\
          splendid son of noble Telamon, easily pushed back\
          the Trojan ranks, as he moved among them. They stood there,\
[370] over Patroclus, wanting desperately to haul him off,                             \
          back to their city, and win glory for themselves.\
          \
          Then Hippothous, noble son of Pelasgian Lethous,\
          began to drag the body by the feet back through the crowd.\
          He\'92d tied his shield strap round both ankle tendons,                                        \
          eager to please Hector and the Trojans. But right away\
          he faced a danger which no one could avert,\
          no matter how much he might want to. For Ajax,\
          moving quickly through the throng, struck him at close range\
          on the bronze cheek piece of his helmet. The spear point\
[380] smashed through the helmet with its horsehair crest, driven on         \
          by the force of Ajax\'92s mighty fists in that huge spear.\
          Blood and brains gushed from the wound and oozed together\
          along the socket of the spear. The strength drained out of him\
          where he was standing. Hippothous let go the feet\
          of brave Patroclus, allowing them to fall and lie there.\
          Then he collapsed, falling face down on the body,                                             \
          far away from rich Larissa. He did not repay\
          his parents for the work they\'92d done to rear him\'97\
          he did not live long enough, slaughtered on the spear\
          of great-hearted Ajax.\
          \
[390] Hector then threw his shining spear                                           \
          at Ajax. But he was directly facing Hector,\
          so he saw it coming. Ajax dodged the weapon,\
          but only just. It hit Schedius, by far the best\
          of men from Phocis, son of great-hearted Iphitus,\
          who lived at home in celebrated Panopeus,\
          ruling many men. Hector\'92s spear struck this man\
          right on the collar bone. The bonze point drove on through\
          and came out by his shoulder. He fell with a crash,                                           \
          his armour rattling round him. Then Ajax struck,\
[400] hitting warlike Phorcys, Phaenops\'92 son, in the gut,                                \
          as he stood over Hippothous. Breaking the plate\
          on body armour, the bronze sliced out his innards.\
          Phorcys fell in the dust, fingers clawing at the earth.\
          At that point glorious Hector and his foremost men\
          drew back. With a tremendous shout, Argives dragged off\
          the bodies of dead Hippothous and Phorcys.\
          They began to strip the armour from their shoulders.\
          \
          Right then war-loving Achaeans would have driven Trojans\
          back to Ilion, conquered by their own cowardice,                                               \
[410] with Argives winning glory beyond what Zeus decreed,                        \
          through their own strong power. But Apollo himself\
          stirred up Aeneas, taking on the form of Periphas,\
          the herald, son of Epytos, who\'92d grown old\
          serving as herald to Aeneas\'92 old father.\
          He was wise and well-disposed towards Aeneas.\
          In this man\'92s form, Apollo, son of Zeus, spoke up:\
          \
          \'93Aeneas, can you not defend steep Ilion\
          in defiance of some god? I\'92ve seen other men\
          who trusted their strong power and courage\
[420] and with their numbers held their country                                               \
          against Zeus\'92 will. But Zeus wants us to win\
          far more than the Danaans, and you all suffer\
          countless fears and won\'92t keep battling on.\'94\
          \
          He finished. Aeneas recognized Apollo,\
          the far shooter, once he\'92d looked into his face.\
          Aeneas then shouted out, addressing Hector:\
          \
          \'93Hector and the rest of you commanders,\
          both Trojans and allies, it would be shameful\
          if war-loving Achaeans drive us back\
[430] all the way to Ilion, if we\'92re beaten                                                  \
          by our cowardice. Some god\'92s just told me\'97\
          he came and stood beside me\'97that even now\
          in this fight high counsellor Zeus is helping us.\
          So let\'92s go straight at these Danaans,                                                          \
          and not let them carry dead Patroclus\
          back to their ships without a battle.\'94\
          \
          Aeneas finished.\
          He strode far ahead of all the fighters at the front,\
          then stood there. Trojans rallied round and made a stand,\
          facing the Achaeans. With his spear, Aeneas\
[440] then struck down Leocritus, son of Arisbas,                                            \
          the courageous companion of Lycomedes.\
          As he fell, war-loving Lycomedes pitied him.     \
          He moved in close, stood there, and threw his shining spear.\
          It hit Apisaon, a son of Hippasus,\
          shepherd of his people, below his abdomen,\
          right in the liver. Apisaon\'92s limbs collapsed.\
          He\'92d come from fertile Paeonia, their best man                                                  \
          in a fight after Asteropaeus, and his fall\
          filled warrior Asteropaeus with sorrow.\
[450] He charged ahead, ready to fight Danaans.                                              \
          But that was now impossible. For they stood there,\
          in a group around Patroclus, holding up their shields\
          on every side, with their spears extending outward.\
          Ajax moved around among them all, giving orders,\
          telling them that no man should move back from the corpse\
          or stride out to fight in front of massed Achaeans.\
          They must all stand firm around the body, fighting\
          hand to hand. That\'92s what mighty Ajax ordered.                                                 \
          Dark blood soaked the earth. The pile of dead bodies grew,\
[460] as they fell\'97Trojans, proud allies, Danaans, too,                                   \
          all together. For as Danaans fought, they shed\
          their own blood also. But far fewer of them died,\
          for they were careful to protect each other\
          from complete destruction in that fighting crowd.\
          \
          So they fought on, like blazing fire. You couldn\'92t tell\
          whether sun and moon still shone, for in that fight\
          a mist surrounded all the best men standing there\
          beside Menoetius\'92 dead son. Meanwhile, other Trojans                                    \
          fought other well-armed Achaeans undisturbed,\
[470] under a clear sky, bright sunshine all around them,                               \
          no clouds above the entire earth or on the mountains.\
          So they fought more casually, keeping their distance,\
          staying out of range of each other\'92s painful weapons.\
          But soldiers in the centre were suffering badly\
          in the fog and fighting. The pitiless bronze\
          was wearing down the finest men.\
          \
          But two warriors,\
          Thrasymedes and Antilochus, well-known men,\
          had not yet learned about the death of lord Patroclus.\
          They thought he was still alive, fighting the Trojans\
[480] in the front ranks of the throng. These two were fighting                               \
          some distance off, watching their companions, keeping track\
          of who was killed or fleeing back, as Nestor had instructed,\
          when he\'92d urged them into battle by their black ships.\
          \
          Throughout that entire day the great combat raged,\
          a bitter conflict. The men kept toiling on without a pause,\
          sweat dripping on their knees and legs, under their feet,\
          and running down men\'92s eyes and hands, as both sides\
          battled over swift-footed Achilles\'92 brave companion.\
          Just as a man gives his people a huge bull\'92s hide\
[490] to stretch, after soaking it in fat, and they stand,                                             \
          once they\'92ve picked it up, in a circle pulling hard,\
          so the moisture quickly leaves the hide, as the fat\
          soaks in under the tension of so many hands\
          stretching the entire skin as far as it will go\'97\
          that\'92s how those men on both sides pulled at the corpse,\
          back and forth in a narrow space, hearts full of hope\'97\
          Trojans seeking to drag it back to Ilion,\
          Achaeans to their hollow ships. Around Patroclus\
          the conflict grew intense. Neither Ares nor Athena,\
[500] who incite warriors to battle, if they\'92d seen that fight,                          \
          would have disparaged it, not even if they\'92d been\
          intensely angry. That\'92s how destructive Zeus made                                           \
          the conflict for men and horses that day men fought\
          over Patroclus.\
          \
          Godlike Achilles, at this time,\
          knew nothing of Patroclus\'92 death, for they were fighting\
          under the walls of Troy, away from the fast ships.\
          He\'92d never imagined in his heart that Patroclus\
          was dead. He thought he was alive and would return\
          once he\'92d reached the gates. He didn\'92t think\
[510] he\'92d lay waste the city with him or without him,                                    \
          for often Achilles had learned this from his mother,\
          listening to her in private, when she\'92d told him\
          what great Zeus had planned. But at that time, Thetis                                      \
          said nothing of the evil which had taken place, \
          the death of his companion, his dearest friend by far.\
          \
          But those beside the corpse kept holding their sharp spears,\
          with no pause in the fighting. The mutual slaughter\
          continued on. Bronze-armed Achaeans talked together,\
          using words like these:\
          \
          \'93My friends,\
[520] there\'92d be no glory for us if we went back                                       \
          to the hollow ships. So let the black earth\
          open here for each of us. That would be better\
          for us all by far than if we leave this corpse\
          for horse-taming Trojans to carry off,\
          back to their city, winning glory.\'94\
          \
          Great-heated Trojans, too, spoke words like these:                                           \
          \
          \'93Friends, if we\'92re all fated to be killed together\
          by this man, let no one leave the battle.\'94\
          \
          Men talked like this to strengthen their companions.\
[530] Then they fought on, the smash of iron rising up                                   \
          through the bronze sky. But the horses of Achilles,\
          descendant of Aeacus, stood some distance from the fight,\
          weeping from the time they first learned their charioteer\
          had fallen in the dust at the hands of Hector,\
          killer of men. Automedon, brave son of Diores,\
          often lashed them with a stroke of his quick whip,                                            \
          and often spoke to them with soothing words or threats,\
          but the two weren\'92t willing to withdraw back to the ships\
          by the broad Hellespont, or go towards Achaeans\
[540] locked in battle. They stayed beside their ornate chariot,                    \
          immobile, like a pillar standing on the tomb\
          of some dead man or woman, heads bowed down to earth.\
          Warm tears flowed from their eyes onto the ground,\
          as they cried, longing for their driver. Their thick manes,\
          covered in dirt, trailed down below their harnesses\
          on both sides of the yoke. Looking at those horses,                                           \
          as they mourned, the son of Cronos pitied them.\
          Shaking his head, Zeus spoke to his own heart:\
          \
          \'93Poor horses!\
          Why did we give you to king Peleus,\
[550] a mortal man, for you\'92re immortal, ageless?                                  \
          Was it so you\'92d experience sorrow\
          among unhappy men? For the truth is this\'97\
          of all the things which breathe or move on earth,\
           nothing is more miserable than man.\
          But at least Hector, Priam\'92s son, won\'92t mount you\
          or drive your finely decorated chariot.\
          That I won\'92t permit. Is it not enough\
          he wears his armour and then brags about it?                                            \
          I\'92ll put strength into your legs and hearts,\
[560] so you can carry Automedon safely                                                  \
          from this battle back to the hollow ships.\
          For I\'92ll still grant glory to the Trojans,\
          to keep on killing till they reach the ships,\
          at sunset, when sacred darkness comes.\'94\
          \
          Saying this, Zeus breathed great strength into those horses.\
          The two shook out their manes, so the dirt fell on the ground.\
          They then set off towards the Trojans and Achaeans,\
          quickly pulling the fast chariot along with them.\
          Behind them Automedon joined the fighting,\
[570] though still grieving for his comrade, swooping down                                     \
          in that chariot like a vulture on a flock of geese.\
          He easily escaped the Trojan battle noise\
          and then with ease charged into the large crowd once more.\
          But in these attacks he didn\'92t kill a man,\
          as he rushed to chase them down. It was impossible,\
          for in the sacred chariot he was by himself.\
          He couldn\'92t wield a spear and manage those swift horses.\
          But at last one of his companions noticed him,\
          Alcimedon, son of Laerces, Haemon\'92s son.\
[580] Standing behind the chariot, he cried to Automedon:                            \
          \
          \'93Automedon, what god put inside your chest\
          this useless plan, stealing your common sense?                                        \
          You\'92re fighting against the Trojans by yourself,\
          in the front ranks of the crowd. Your comrade\
          has been killed, and on his shoulders Hector\
          is now wearing the armour of Achilles\'97\
          he celebrates his glorious triumph.\'94\
          \
          Automedon, son of Diores, replied:\
          \
          \'93Alcimedon, what Achaean warrior\
[590] is better able to control and guide                                                   \
          these strong immortal horses than yourself,\
          except Patroclus, a man as wise as gods,\
          while he was alive? Now he\'92s met his death,\
          his fate. So take the shining reins and whip.\
          I\'92ll get down from the chariot and fight.\'94                                                    \
          \
          Automedon spoke. Then Alcimedon, springing up\
          into that fast chariot, quickly grabbed the reins and whip.\
          Automedon jumped out. Seeing this, glorious Hector\
          at once spoke to Aeneas, who was close by:\
          \
[600] \'93Aeneas, counselor to bronze-armed Trojans,                                \
          I see the two-horse team of swift Achilles\
          coming to this fighting with poor charioteers.\
          That pair I\'92d like to capture, if your heart\
          is willing, since those men lack the courage\
          to confront the two of us, if we attack,\
          or to stand and fight against us both.\'94\
          \
          Hector spoke. Anchises\'92 strong son was not unwilling.                                     \
          So the two moved straight ahead, guarding their shoulders\
          under bull\'92s hide shields, tanned and tough, with thick bronze\
[610] hammered out on top. With them went Chromius,                                \
          and godlike Aretus, fully hoping in their hearts\
          they\'92d kill the men, then drive those strong-necked horses off.\
          What fools! They would not return from Automedon\
          without shedding their own blood. Then Automedon\
          prayed to Father Zeus, and his dark heart was filled\
          with strength and courage. Immediately he spoke out\
          to Alcimedon, his loyal companion:                                                                      \
          \
          \'93Alcimedon,\
          make sure you keep the horses close to me,\
          so they breathe right on my neck. I don\'92t think\
[620] Hector, son of Priam, will check his fury,                                        \
          until he\'92s killed the pair of us and climbed\
          behind the fine manes of these horses\
          belonging to Achilles, then driven in flight\
          the Argive ranks, or himself been slaughtered\
          among the front-line fighters.\'94\
          \
          Automedon finished,\
          then shouted to both Ajaxes and Menelaus:\
          \
          \'93You Ajaxes, both Argive leaders, Menelaus,\
          leave that corpse to the rest of our best men,\
          who\'92ll stand firm around it. Protect the two of us\
[630] from ruthless fate while we\'92re still living.                                                 \
          For Hector and Aeneas, Troy\'92s best men\
          in this harsh fight, are coming hard against us.\
          But these things lie in the lap of the gods,\
          so I\'92ll attempt a throw\'97whatever happens,\
          it\'92s all up to Zeus.\'94\
          \
          Saying this, Automedon\
          hefted his long-shadowed spear and threw it, hitting\
          the round shield of Aretus, which didn\'92t stop it.\
          The bronze went straight on through, severed his belt,\
          then drove low in his stomach. Just as a strong man\
[640] with a sharp axe strikes a farm ox right behind its horns,                               \
          slicing clean through sinews, so the ox stumbles forward\
          and falls down\'97that\'92s how Aretus jerked forward and then fell\
          onto his back. Once that sharp spear impaled itself,\
          quivering in his organs, his limbs gave way.\
          Then Hector threw his bright spear at Automedon,\
          but since he was directly facing Hector,\
          he saw the bronze spear coming and evaded it\
          by leaning forward. The long spear stuck in the ground\
          behind him, its shaft trembling until great Ares\
[650] stilled its force. Now they would have charged each other                             \
          and fought hand to hand with swords, but the Ajaxes\
          made them move apart for all their battle fury.\
          They came through the crowd answering their comrade\'92s shout.\
          Hector, Aeneas, and godlike Chromius,\
          afraid of both Ajaxes, moved back once again,\
          leaving Aretus lying there with a mortal wound.\
          Automedon, swift Ares\'92 equal, stripped the armour,\
          boasting in triumph:\
          \
          \'93I\'92ve managed here\
          to ease somewhat my heart\'92s grief for the death\
[660] of Menoetius\'92 son, though the man I\'92ve killed                               \
          is a lesser man than he.\'94\
          \
          With these words,\
          he took the blood-stained spoils and put them in the chariot.                                 \
          Then he got in, feet and upper arms all bloody,\
          like a lion that\'92s just gorged itself on cattle.\
          \
          Then once more over Patroclus the bitter fight\
          resumed\'97fierce and full of sorrow. Athena\
          stirred up the conflict, coming down from heaven,\
          sent by wide-seeing Zeus to urge on the Danaans.\
          For his mind had changed. Just as for mortal men\
[670] Zeus bends his coloured rainbow down from heaven,                            \
          an omen prophesying war or some harsh storm,\
          upsetting flocks and stopping men from work                                                    \
          upon the earth\'97that\'92s how Athena then placed herself\
          in the Achaean throng, wrapped in a purple mist.\
          She stirred up all the men, giving encouragement\
          first to courageous Menelaus, son of Atreus,\
          who was close by her. Taking the form of Phoenix,\
          in his untiring voice she said:\
          \
          \'93Surely, Menelaus,\
          you\'92ll be disgraced, have to hang your head in shame,\
[680] if Achilles\'92 fine and loyal companion                                               \
          is ravaged by swift dogs beneath Troy\'92s walls.\
          So be brave. Stand firm. Encourage all your men.\'94\
          \
          Menelaus, expert in war shouts, answered her:                                                   \
          \
          \'93Old Phoenix, you venerable old man,\
          if only Athena would give me strength,\
          defend me from this shower of weapons,\
          I\'92d be happy to stand above Patroclus,\
          protecting him. His death has touched my heart.\
          But Hector has the power of deadly fire.\
[690] He won\'92t stop cutting men down with his bronze,                        \
          for Zeus is giving him the glory.\'94\
          \
          Menelaus\'92 words pleased the bright-eyed goddess,\
          Athena, for he\'92d first prayed to her of all the gods.\
          She put strength into his shoulders and his knees.\
          Then in his chest she set the persistence of a gnat,                                            \
          which, no matter how much one brushes it away\
          from someone\'92s skin, keeps on biting\'97it finds human blood\
          so sweet\'97with that stamina she filled up his dark heart.\
          Standing over Patroclus, he hurled his shining spear.\
[700] Among the Trojans was a rich, brave man called Podes,                        \
          son of E\'ebtion, to whom Hector granted\
          special honour among men as his companion,\
          his good friend at a feast. Fair-haired Menelaus\
          struck him with his spear, as he began to flee.\
          He hit him on the belt. The bronze drove straight on through.\
          Podes fell with a thud. Then Menelaus, Atreus\'92 son,                                          \
          dragged the corpse away from Trojans into the crowd\
          of his companions.\
          \
          At that point, Apollo\
          came up close to Hector to reinforce his spirit.\
[710] He took the form of Phaenops, son of Asius,                                           \
          of all Hector\'92s guests the one he liked the most.\
          Phaenops lived at home in Abydos. In his shape,\
          Apollo, son of Zeus, spoke out:\
          \
          \'93Hector,\
          which of the Achaeans will now fear you,\
          since you\'92re afraid of Menelaus,\
          who so far has been a feeble spearman?\
          But all by himself he\'92s snatched a body\
          from the Trojans and gone off with it.\
          He\'92s killed your trusty comrade Podes,\
[720] E\'ebtion\'92s son, a noble front-line warrior.\'94                                                   \
          \
          As he spoke, black clouds of grief enveloped Hector.\
          He strode by the foremost fighters, armed in gleaming bronze.\
          Then the son of Cronos took his tasselled aegis,\
          all glittering, hid Ida behind clouds, then flashed\
          his lightning, with a tremendous peal of thunder,\
          as he shook the aegis, awarding victory\
          to Trojans and making Achaeans run away.\
          \
          The first to begin the rout was Peneleus,\
          a Boeotian. Standing there facing the enemy,\
[730] as usual, he was hit in the shoulder by a spear                                        \
          from Polydamas, who\'92d come in close to throw.\
          It was a glancing blow, but the point of the spear\
          sliced quite near the bone. Then at close quarters, Hector                               \
          attacked Leitus, son of great-hearted Alectryon.\
          Hector sliced his wrist, and so his fighting ended.\
          Looking around him anxiously, Leitus drew back\'97\
          he knew if he couldn\'92t grip his spear, he had no hope\
          of fighting Trojans. As Hector went at Leitus,\
          Idomeneus threw and struck his body armour\
[740] on the chest, right beside the nipple. But the long spear                       \
          broke at the socket. The Trojans gave a shout.\
          Then Hector threw a spear at Idomeneus,\
          Deucalion\'92s son. He missed him, but not by much.\
          He did hit Coeranus, Meriones\'92 comrade,                                                            \
          his charioteer, who\'92d followed him from well-built Lyctus.\
          Idomeneus had come from the curving ships that day\
          on foot and would\'92ve given the Trojans a great triumph,\
          if Coeranus hadn\'92t quickly driven up\
          with his swift-footed horses. For Idomeneus\
[750] he came as a saving light, protecting him                                                \
          from ruthless fate. But the act cost him his life\
          at the hands of man-killing Hector, who struck him\
          underneath his jaw and ear. The spear smashed his teeth,\
          roots and all, splitting his tongue in half. Coeranus\
          tumbled from the chariot. The reins fell on the ground.\
          Meriones stooped down and scooped them from the plain                              \
          with his own hands, then spoke to Idomeneus:\
          \
          \'93Now lash these horses on until you reach\
          our swift ships. For you recognize yourself\
[760] that Achaeans will not win this victory.\'94                                        \
          \
          Meriones finished. And so Idomeneus\
          whipped the fair-maned horses back to the hollow ships,\
          for by now a fear had fallen on his heart, as well.\
          \
          Great-hearted Ajax and Menelaus also knew\
          that Zeus had turned the tide of battle now, giving\
          victory to the Trojans. The first one to speak\
          was Telamonian Ajax:\
          \
          \'93Here\'92s a problem.\
          Even a fool can see that Father Zeus\
          is now personally helping Trojans.                                                               \
[770] All their flying weapons hit a target,                                               \
          whether a brave man throws them or a coward\'97\
          Zeus makes them all fly straight. In our case,\
          all our throws fall wasted on the ground.\
          But come, let\'92s sort out the best course of action,\
          so we both can drag the corpse and then get back\
          in person to bring joy to our companions.\
          They must be anxious as they watch us here,\
          thinking we can\'92t check the fighting frenzy\
          of man-killing Hector, his all-conquering hands,\
[780] and we\'92ll withdraw to our black ships. I wish                                 \
          some comrade would report back quickly                                                  \
          to Peleus\'92 son, for I don\'92t think he\'92s learned\
          the dreadful news of his dear comrade\'92s death.\
          But I can\'92t see any Argive who could do that.\
          Men and horses are all shrouded in this mist.\
          Father Zeus, rescue these Achaean sons\
          from this fog, make the sky clear, let us see\
          with our own eyes. Since it gives you pleasure,\
          kill us, but do in the light of day.\'94\
          \
[790] As he finished, Ajax wept. Father Zeus pitied him.                                 \
          At once he dispersed the mist, scattering the haze.\
          The sun shone down, and all the fight came into view.                                     \
          Then Ajax spoke to Menelaus, skilled at war shouts:\
          \
          \'93Look now, divinely raised Menelaus,\
          see if you can spot Antilochus alive,\
          son of great-hearted Nestor. Get him to go\
          with speed to rouse up fiery Achilles,\
          by telling him his companion, the man\
          he loves the most by far, has just been killed.\'94\
          \
[800] Ajax spoke. Menelaus, expert at war shouts, agreed.                             \
          He went off like some lion moving from a farm,\
          exhausted by his attacks on dogs and men,\
          who prevent it tearing flesh out of some cow,\
          keeping their watch all night\'97but ravenous for meat,                                      \
          the beast keeps charging in without success, for spears\
          rain down, thrown by keen hands, then burning sticks,\
          which, for all his fierce desire, make him afraid,\
          so he slinks away at dawn in disappointment\'97\
          that\'92s how Menelaus, skilled at war cries,\
[810] left Patroclus, much against his will\'97he feared                                     \
          Achaeans might be pushed back in painful flight,\
          leaving the corpse a trophy for the enemy.\
          He issued many orders to Meriones\
          to the Ajaxes, as well:\
          \
          \'93You two Ajaxes,\
          Argive leaders, and you, Meriones,\
          let each man bear in mind the kindnesses                                                  \
          of poor Patroclus, who, when he was alive,\
          knew how to treat every man with care.    \
          Now fatal death has overtaken him.\'94\
          \
[820] With these words, fair-haired Menelaus went away,                             \
          glancing warily in all directions, like an eagle,\
          which, men say, has the sharpest sight of all the animals\
          flying in the sky\'97a bird which, while soaring high,\
          doesn\'92t miss the swiftly running hare crouched down\
          under a leafy bush, and, swooping low, seizes it\
          at once, and then tears out its life\'97that\'92s how, Menelaus,\
          raised by gods, your bright eyes kept searching all around\
          through groups of many comrades, seeking Nestor\'92s son,                                 \
          to see if he was still alive. Then Menelaus,\
[830] quickly seeing him on the left flank of the battle                                   \
          encouraging his companions, urging them to fight,\
          came up to him. Then fair-haired Menelaus said:\
          \
          \'93Divinely raised Antilochus, come here,\
          so you can learn the painful news, something\
          I wish had never happened. You already know,\
          I think, for your own eyes can see it,\
          how some god is rolling this disaster\
          over the Danaans, giving victory\
          to the Trojans. The best Achaean,\
[840] Patroclus, has been slaughtered, a huge loss                                            \
          for the Danaans, who miss him badly.\
          You must run quickly to Achaean ships\
          to tell Achilles, so he can bring the corpse\
          in safety to his ship\'97the naked body,\
          for now Hector of the gleaming helmet\
          wears his armour.\'94\
          \
          Menelaus finished speaking.\
          Hearing that news, Antilochus was overwhelmed.\
          For a long time he stood in shock, speechless. His eyes\
          filled up with tears, his strong voice failed. But even so,\
[850] he did not neglect what Menelaus told him.                                           \
          Giving his armour to his noble comrade\
          Laodocus, who drove the horses close beside him,\
          he set off on the run. As he wept, his swift feet                                                   \
          took him from the battle, bearing the bad news\
          to Achilles, son of Peleus. And then your heart,\
          divinely raised Menelaus, had no desire\
          to help defend the hard-pressed comrades left there\
          by Antilochus, men of Pylos, who felt his loss\
          severely. But to assist them, Menelaus\
[860] sent godlike Thrasymedes. Then he went in person                              \
          to stand by warrior Patroclus. Running over,\
          he took up a position by both Ajaxes and said:\
          \
          \'93I\'92ve sent Antilochus to our fast ships,\
          to swift Achilles. Still, I don\'92t expect\
          he\'92ll come out now, no matter how enraged\
          he is with godlike Hector. He can\'92t fight                                                     \
          at all against the Trojans without armour.\
          But now we should consider for ourselves\
          the best thing we should do, so we\'92ll be able\
[870] to haul off the corpse and leave this Trojan tumult,                     \
          escaping our own death and our destruction.\'94\
          \
          Great Telamonian Ajax then answered him:\
          \
          \'93Glorious Menelaus, everything you say\
          is true enough. So you and Meriones\
          stoop down and lift the body quickly,\
          as fast possible. Take it from this fight.\
          We\'92ll hold off the Trojans and godlike Hector,\
          standing behind you with a single heart,                                                    \
          just as we share one name. We\'92ve stood firm before,\
[880] holding our positions by each other,                                               \
          in the face of Ares, the fierce god of war.\'94\
          \
          Ajax spoke. Then they raised the body off the ground,\
          lifting it high with one great heave. Behind them,\
          Trojans soldiers gave a shout, as they saw Achaeans\
          hoisting up the corpse. They went after them like hounds\
          charging ahead of youthful hunters, as they chase\
          some wounded wild boar, keen to rip it into pieces,\
          but once it wheels around on them, sure of its strength,\
          they run back in fear, scattering in all directions\'97\
[890] that\'92s how groups of Trojans kept following them a while,                             \
          thrusting at them with swords and double-bladed spears,\
          but when both Ajaxes turned round to stand against them,\
          their colour changed, and no one dared rush forward\
          to battle for the dead.\
          \
          So these men worked hard\
          to bring that body from the battle to the hollow ships,\
          in the face of a fierce conflict, like some fire\
          suddenly rushing at a city full of people,\
          setting it alight, so houses fall among the flames,\
          as winds whip the inferno on. That\'92s how the din\
[900] of chariots and spearmen coming up against them                                          \
          kept resounding as they moved along. But like mules\
          throwing their great strength into their work, as they haul\
          a beam or huge ship timber on an uneven path\
          down from the mountains, hearts worn out with the strain,\
          as they work on covered in sweat\'97that\'92s how these men\
          strove hard to carry off the corpse. Behind them,\
          both Ajaxes held off the enemy. Just as\
          a wooded ridge which cuts across a plain holds back\
          a flood, even the strong flow of some harsh rivers,\
[910] pushing their waters back to go across the plain,                                              \
          for the strength of their current cannot rupture it\'97\
          that\'92s how both Ajaxes held back the Trojans then\
          in that fight. But Trojans kept up their pursuit,\
          especially two of them\'97Aeneas, Anchises\'92 son,\
          and glorious Hector. Just as a flock of daws or starlings\
          flies off in screaming fear, once they see a falcon\
          as it comes after them, bringing death to all small birds\'97\
          that\'92s how the young Achaean soldiers ran off then,\
          away from Hector and Aeneas, screaming in panic,\
[920] forgetting all their fierce desire for battle.                                               \
          As Danaans fled, plenty of fine weapons fell                                                       \
          around the ditch. But there was no let up in the war.}