{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf460
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural\qc

\f0\fs24 \cf0 Book Eighteen\
The Arms of Achilles\
          \

\i [Antilochus brings the news to Achilles of Patroclus' death; Achilles collapses in grief; Thetis hears his grief, talks to her sister Nereids, then visits Achilles, promises to bring him new armour from Hephaestus; Iris visits Achilles with a message from Hera; Achilles displays himself to the Trojans by the ditch and wall; Trojans debate what to do; Polydamas advises retreat; Hector opposes him; Achaeans take Patroclus' body back to the ships, begin their laments over Patroclus; Thetis visits Hephaestus, requests new armour for Achilles; Hephaestus makes new armour, especially a new shield; Thetis leaves with the armour]\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\i0 \cf0           \
          As the men fought on like a blazing fire raging,\
          swift-footed Antilochus came to Achilles\
          with his news. He found Achilles by his beaked ship,\
          sensing in himself what had already happened,\
          speaking with a troubled mind to his own great heart:\
          \
          \'93Why are long-haired Achaeans once again\
          retreating to their ships, being beaten back\
          across the plain in terror? I hope the gods\
          have not done something that will break my heart.\
  [10] My mother told me once they\'92d do that,                                         \
          when she told me that while I was alive\
          the best man of the Myrmidons would leave                                             \
          the sun\'92s light at the hands of Trojans.\
          So it must be the case that the fine son\
          of Menoetius is dead, that reckless man.\
          I told him to return back to the ships,\
          once he\'92d saved them from consuming fire,\
          and not face up to Hector man to man.\'94\
          \
          As Achilles in his mind and heart was thinking this,\
  [20] noble Nestor\'92s son approached, shedding warm tears.                          \
          He told him the agonizing truth:                                      \
          \
          \'93Son of warlike Peleus,\
          you must hear this dreadful news\'97something\
          I wish weren\'92t so\'97Patroclus lies dead.                                                       \
          Men are fighting now around the body.\
          He\'92s stripped. Hector with his gleaming helmet\
          has the armour.\'94                             \
          \
          Antilochus finished speaking.\
          A black cloud of grief swallowed up Achilles.\
          With both hands he scooped up soot and dust and poured it\
          on his head, covering his handsome face with dirt,\
  [30] covering his sweet-smelling tunic with black ash.                                 \
          He lay sprawling\'97his mighty warrior\'92s massive body\
          collapsed and stretched out in the dust. With his hands,\
          he tugged at his own hair, disfiguring himself.\
          The women slaves acquired as battle trophies\
          by Achilles and Patroclus, hearts overwhelmed\
          with anguish, began to scream aloud. They rushed outside\
          and beat their breasts around warlike Achilles.                                                  \
          Then all the women\'92s legs gave way, and they fell down.\
          Across from them, Antilochus lamented,\
  [40] eyes full of tears, as he held Achilles by the hand.                                 \
          Achilles\'92 noble heart moaned aloud. Antilochus\
          feared he might hurt himself or slit his throat\
          with his own sword. Achilles gave a huge cry of grief.\
          His noble mother heard it from the ocean depths\
          where she was sitting by her ancient father.\
          She began to wail. Then around her gathered\
          all the divine daughters of Nereus deep in the sea\'97\
          Glauce, Thaleia, Cymodoce, Nesaea,\
          Speio, Thoe, ox-eyed Hali\'eb, Cymotho\'eb,                                                               \
  [50] Actaia, Limnoreia, Melite, Iaera,                                                               \
          Amphithoe, Agave, Doto, Proto,\
          Pherousa, Dynamene, Dexamene,\
          Amphinome, Callianeira, Doris, Panope,\
          lovely Galatea, Nemertes, Apseudes,\
          Callianassa. Also there were Clymene,\
          Ianeira, Ianassa, Maera, Orithyia,\
          Amatheia with her lovely hair, and others,\
          Nereus\'92 daughters living in the ocean depths.\
          They filled the glistening cave, beating their breasts.                                        \
          Thetis led them all in their laments:                           \
          \
  [60] \'93Sister Nereids, listen,                                                      \
          so all of you, hearing what I say,\
          will understand my heart\'92s enormous sorrow.\
          Alas, for my unhappy misery,\
          that to my grief I bore the best of men.\
          For when I gave birth to a fine strong boy\
          to be an excellent heroic warrior,\
          when he\'92d grown as tall as some young sapling,\
          for I\'92d raised him like a lovely orchard tree,\
          I sent him out in the beaked ships to Ilion,\
  [70] to war against the Trojans. But now,                                               \
          I\'92ll never welcome him back home again,                                                   \
          returning to the house of Peleus.\
          While he\'92s still alive and sees the sunlight,\
          he lives in sorrow. When I go to him,\
          I can provide no help. But I shall go\
          to look on my dear child, to hear what grief\
          has overtaken him while he remains\
          detached from all the fighting.\'94\
          \
          With these words,\
          Thetis left the cave. Her sisters went with her in tears.\
  [80] Around them sea waves parted, until they came                                    \
          to fertile Troy. They emerged, climbing up on shore,\
          one after another, right where the Myrmidons\
          had dragged up their ships in close-packed formation\
          near swift Achilles. Then his noble mother moved                                            \
          beside him, as he was groaning bitterly.\
          With a sharp cry, she cradled her son\'92s head, then spoke.\
          As she grieved, she talked to him\'97her words had wings:\
          \
          \'93My child, why are you crying? What sorrow now\
          has come into your heart? Speak out. Hide nothing.\
  [90] Zeus has given you what you begged him to                                  \
          when you stretched your hands out to him\'97\
          all Achaea\'92s sons by their ships\'92 sterns\
          are hemmed in there, desperate for your help,\
          suffering a terrible ordeal.\'94                                      \
          \
          With a heavy groan,\
          swift-footed Achilles then answered Thetis:                                                  \
          \
          \'93Yes, Mother,\
          Olympian Zeus has indeed accomplished\
          what I asked. But what pleasure\'92s there for me,                                         \
          when Patroclus, my beloved companion,\
          has been destroyed, the man I honoured\
[100] as my equal, above all my comrades.                                               \
          I\'92ve lost him and the armour, which Hector took,\
          once he\'92d killed him, that massive armour,\
          so wonderful to look at, which the gods\
          gave as a priceless gift to Peleus\
          on that day they placed you in the bed\
          of a mortal man. If only you had stayed\
          among the eternal maidens of the sea\
          and Peleus had married a mortal wife.\
          But now there\'92ll be innumerable sorrows\
[110] waiting for your heart, once your child is killed.                           \
          You won\'92t be welcoming him back home again.                                        \
          My own heart has no desire to live on,\
          to continue living among men,\
          unless Hector is hit by my spear first,\
          losing his life and paying me compensation\
          for killing Menoetius\'92 son, Patroclus.\'94\
          \
          Through her tears, Thetis then answered Achilles:\
          \
          \'93My son, from what you\'92ve just been saying,\
          you\'92re fated to an early death, for your doom\
[120] comes quickly as soon as Hector dies.\'94                                           \
          \
          Swift-footed Achilles answered her with passion:\
          \
          \'93Then let me die, since I could not prevent\
          the death of my companion. He\'92s fallen\
          far from his homeland. He needed me there                                              \
          to protect him from destruction. So now,\
          since I\'92m not returning to my own dear land,\
          and for Patroclus was no saving light\
          or for my many other comrades,\
          all those killed by godlike Hector while I sat\
[130] here by the ships, a useless burden                                                  \
          on the earth\'97and I\'92m unmatched in warfare\
          by any other Achaean armed in bronze,\
          although in council other men are better\'97\
          so let wars disappear from gods and men\
          and passionate anger, too, which incites\
          even the prudent man to that sweet rage,\
          sweeter than trickling honey in men\'92s throats,\
          which builds up like smoke inside their chests,                                        \
          as Agamemnon, king of men, just now,\
[140] made me enraged. But we\'92ll let that pass.                                       \
          For all the pain I feel, I\'92ll suppress the heart\
          within my chest, as I must. So now I\'92ll go\
          to meet Hector, killer of the man I loved.\
          As for my own fate, let it come to me\
          when Zeus and the other deathless gods\
          determine. For not even strong Hercules,\
          the man lord Zeus, son of Cronos, loved the most,\
          escaped his death. He was destroyed by Fate\
          and by malicious Hera\'92s anger, too.\
[150] And so for me. If a like fate has been set,                                                   \
          then once I\'92m dead, I\'92ll just lie there. But for now,\
          let me seize great glory\'97let me make\
          so many Trojan and Dardan matrons weep,\
          and with both hands wipe tears from their soft cheeks,\
          and set them on to constant lamentation,\
          so that they\'92ll know I\'92ve long refrained from war.\
          Don\'92t keep me from battle. Though you love me,\
          you\'92ll not convince me.\'94                                                                    \
          \
          Silver-footed Thetis\
          then said to Achilles:                                  \
          \
          \'93My child, what you say is true\'97\
[160] it\'92s no bad thing to protect companions                                          \
          when they\'92re in trouble from complete disaster.\
          But now the Trojans have your lovely armour,                                          \
          all your glittering bronze. It\'92s on the shoulders\
          of Hector with the shining helmet\'97\
          he boasts about it. But I don\'92t think\
          his triumph will last long, since his death\
          is coming closer. But you must not rejoin\
          Ares\'92 conflict until with your own eyes\
          you see me in the morning here again.\
[170] I\'92ll return at sunrise, and I\'92ll bring you                                             \
          lovely armour made by lord Hephaestus.\'94\
          \
          Saying this, Thetis turned away from her own son\
          to address her ocean sisters:                                             \
          \
          \'93Now you must plunge                                                       \
          into the broad lap of Ocean and go find\
          the Old Man of the Sea in our father\'92s house.\
          Tell him everything. I\'92ll go to high Olympus,\
          to that famous artisan Hephaestus,\
          to see if he is willing to give my son\
          some splendid glittering armour.\'94\
          \
          Thetis spoke.\
[180] Her sisters quickly plunged under the waves.                                         \
          Then the silver-footed goddess Thetis went away\
          to fetch that lovely armour from Olympus\
          for her beloved son.                                         \
          \
          As Thetis\'92 feet carried her\
          towards Olympus, Achaeans were running back,\
          with a huge noise, fleeing man-killing Hector,\
          until they reached their ships beside the Hellespont.                                       \
          But those well-armed Achaeans couldn\'92t extricate\
          Achilles\'92 comrade, dead Patroclus, from the spears,\
          for they\'92d been overtaken by Trojan warriors\
[190] and chariots once again, with Hector, Priam\'92s son,                                \
          as furious as fire. Three times glorious Hector,\
          from behind, seized the corpse\'92s feet, keen to drag it off,\
          shouting furiously to his Trojans. Three times,\
          the two Ajaxes, clothed in their full battle strength,\
          beat him from the corpse. But Hector kept on coming\
          without a pause, confident of his fighting power.\
          Sometimes he charged right at them in the frenzied crowd.\
          Sometimes he just stood there and gave a mighty yell,\
          but he never yielded any ground. Just as shepherds                                           \
[200] are unable to drive off from their farmyard                                             \
          a tawny ravenous lion by some carcass\'97\
          so the two warrior Ajaxes could not push Hector,\
          Priam\'92s son, back from that body. And now Hector\
          would have seized that corpse, winning infinite glory,\
          if swift Iris with feet like wind had not come down,\
          speeding from Olympus to the son of Peleus,\
          with a message that he should arm himself for war.\
          Hera had sent her, unknown to Zeus and other gods.\
          Standing by Achilles, Iris spoke\'97her words had wings:           \
          \
[210] \'93Rouse yourself, son of Peleus, most feared of men.                                \
          Defend Patroclus. For on his behalf\
          a deadly conflict rages by the ships\'97\
          men are butchering each other, some trying\
          to protect the dead man\'92s corpse, while others,\
          the Trojans, charge in to carry it away\
          to windy Ilion. The one most eager\
          to haul the body off is glorious Hector,\
          whose heart is set on hacking off the head\
          from its soft neck. He\'92ll fix it on a stake\
[220] set in the wall. So get up. No more lying here.                               \
          Your heart will be disgraced if Patroclus\
          becomes a plaything for the dogs of Troy\'97\
          his mutilated corpse will be your shame.\'94                                                  \
          \
          Swift-footed godlike Achilles then asked her:\
          \
          \'93Goddess Iris, which of the gods sent you\
          with this message to me?\'94                                                  \
          \
          Swift Iris,\
          with feet like wind, then said to Achilles:\
          \
          \'93Hera sent me, Zeus\'92 glorious wife.\
          Cronos\'92 son, who sits on high, doesn\'92t know,\
[230] nor do any other immortal gods                                                       \
          inhabiting snow-capped Olympus.\'94\
          \
          Swift-footed Achilles then questioned Iris:\
          \
          \'93But how can I rejoin that conflict?\
          Those men have my armour. My dear mother\
          has told me not to arm myself for war,\
          not until my own eyes see that she\'92s come back.                                       \
          She promised to bring me splendid armour\
          from Hephaestus. I don\'92t know anyone\
          whose glorious equipment I could use,\
[240] with the exception of the shield of Ajax,                                         \
          son of Telamon. But I expect he\'92s out there\
          with his spear among the front-line warriors\
          in that conflict over dead Patroclus.\'94\
          \
          Wind-swift Iris then answered Achilles:\
          \
          \'93We know well enough your lovely armour\
          is in Trojan hands. But you should go now,\
          just as you are, to the ditch. Show yourself\
          to Trojans. It may happen that the Trojans,\
          afraid of you, will pull back from battle,\
[250] giving Achaea\'92s exhausted warlike sons                                                     \
          a breathing space. For rests in war are rare.\'94\
          \
          With these words, swift-footed Iris went away.\
          Then Achilles, loved by Zeus, moved into action.\
          Around his powerful shoulders Athena set\
          her tasselled aegis. Then the lovely goddess\
          wrapped his head up in a golden cloud, so from him\
          a fiery light blazed out. Just like those times when smoke\
          from a city stretches all the way to heaven,\
          rising in the distance from an island under siege\
[260] by an enemy, where men fight all day long                                              \
          in Ares\'92 hateful war, struggling for their city\'97\
          then at sunset, they light fires one by one,                                                          \
          beacons flaming upwards to attract attention\
          from those on near-by islands, so their ships will come\
          to save them from destruction\'97that\'92s how the light\
          blazed then from Achilles\'92 head right up to heaven.\
          He strode from the wall, then stood there by the ditch.\
          But recalling what his mother had said to him,\
          he didn\'92t mingle with Achaeans. As he stood there,\
[270] he cried out. From far away, Pallas Athena                                              \
          added her voice, too, causing great consternation\
          among the Trojans. As thrilling as a trumpet\'92s note\
          when it rings clearly, when rapacious enemies                                                   \
          besiege a city\'97that\'92s how sharp and piercing\
          Achilles\'92 voice was then. When the Trojans heard it,\
          that brazen shout Achilles gave, all their hearts\
          were shaken. Their horses with the lovely manes\
          turned back the chariots, anticipating trouble\
          in their hearts. Charioteers were terrified, seeing\
[280] the fearful inextinguishable fire blazing                                                  \
          from the head of the great-hearted son of Peleus.\
          For Athena, goddess with the glittering eyes,\
          kept it burning. Three times godlike Achilles yelled\
          across that ditch. Three times Trojans and their allies\
          were thrown into confusion. At that moment,\
          twelve of their best men were killed by their own chariots                              \
          and their own spears. Achaeans then, with stronger hearts,\
          pulled Patroclus out of spear range and laid him on a cot.\
          His dear companions gathered mourning round him,\
[290] Achilles with them, shedding hot tears when he saw                            \
          his loyal companion lying on a death bed,\
          mutilated by sharp bronze. He\'92d sent him out to war\
          with chariot and horses, but never welcomed him\
          at his return.                                         \
          \
          Then ox-eyed queen Hera\
          made the unwearied sun, against his will, go down                                           \
          into the stream of Ocean. So the sun set.\
          Godlike Achaeans now could pause for some relief\
          from the destructive killing of impartial war.\
          \
          For their part, once Trojans drew back from that harsh fight,\
[300] they untied swift horses from their chariots and then,                          \
          before they thought of food, called for a meeting.\
          There everyone stayed standing. No one dared sit down,\
          all terrified because Achilles had appeared,\
          after his long absence from that savage conflict.\
          The first to speak was Polydamas, Panthous\'92 son,\
          a prudent man, the only one who weighed with care                                         \
          the past and future. He was Hector\'92s comrade,\
          both born on the same night. As a public speaker,\
          he was the better of the two, but Hector\
[310] far surpassed him with a spear. Bearing in mind                                    \
          their common good, Polydamas addressed them:\
          \
          \'93My friends, consider both sides of this issue.\
          For my part, I advise us to return\
          into the city\'97we should not stay here,\
          on the plain, waiting for dawn beside the ships.\
          Our walls are far away. While Achilles\
          kept up his anger at lord Agamemnon,\
          Achaeans were easier to fight against.\
          Personally, I was glad to spend the night\
[320] by their swift ships, hoping then we\'92d capture                                          \
          those curved vessels. But now I really have\
          a dreadful fear of Peleus\'92 swift-footed son.\
          He has a reckless heart\'97he\'92s not a man\
          to rest content in the middle of the plain,\
          where Trojans and Achaeans have a share\
          of Ares\'92 battle fury. No, he\'92ll fight on\
          for our city and our women. So let\'92s go back,\
          return into the city. Trust me when I say\
          that\'92s how things will go. For now, sacred night\
[330] has stopped the swift-footed son of Peleus.                                   \
          But if tomorrow he moves into action\
          fully armed and encounters us still here,\
          we\'92ll recognize him well enough. Anyone\
          who gets away and makes it back to Ilion                                                  \
          will be a happy man. For dogs and vultures\
          will eat many Trojans. I don\'92t want to hear\
          that such events have happened. If we all\
          follow my advice, although reluctantly,\
          tonight we\'92ll collect our forces in one group.\
[340] Walls, high gates, and doors with fitted planks,                            \
          polished and bolted shut, will guard the city.\
          But in the morning early, we\'92ll arm ourselves,\
          then take up our positions on the walls.\
          If Achilles comes from the ships keen to fight\
          for our walls, then he\'92ll be disappointed.\
          He\'92ll go back to his ships, once he\'92s worn out                                            \
          his strong-necked horses with too much running,\
          scampering around below our city wall.\
          His heart won\'92t let him force his way inside,\
[350] and he\'92ll not lay waste our city, not before                                     \
          our swift dogs eat him up for dinner.\'94\
          \
          With a scowl, Hector of the flashing helmet then replied:\
          \
          \'93Polydamas, what you say displeases me\'97\
          you tell us to run back to the city\
          and stay inside it. Haven\'92t you already\
          been cooped up long enough within those walls?\
          In earlier days, all mortal men would claim\
          that Priam\'92s city was rich in gold and bronze.\
          But now those splendid treasures are all gone.                                          \
[360] Many goods from our own homes we\'92ve sold.                                \
          They went to Phrygia or fair Maeonia,\
          once great Zeus, in anger, turned against us.\
          But now, when crooked-minded Cronos\'92 son\
          allows me to win glory by the ships,\
          hemming the Achaeans in beside the sea,\
          this is no time, you fool, to say such things\
          before the people. Not a single Trojan\
          will take your advice. I won\'92t permit it.\
          But come, let\'92s all follow now what I suggest.\
[370] You must take your dinner at your stations                                   \
          all through the army, making sure you watch,\
          with every man awake. Any Trojan\
          too concerned about his property                                                                \
          should gather it up and give it to the men\
          for common use. Better that one of us\
          gets use from it than that Achaeans do.\
          Tomorrow morning early, right at dawn,\
          we\'92ll fully arm ourselves with weapons,\
          then take keen battle to those hollow ships.\
[380] If indeed it\'92s true that lord Achilles                                                 \
          is returning to that battle by the ships,\
          if he wants that, so much the worse for him.\
          I won\'92t run from him in painful battle,\
          but stand against him, fighting face to face,\
          whether great victory goes to him or me.\
          In war the odds are equal, and the man\
          who seeks to kill may well be killed himself.\'94\
          \
          Hector spoke. The Trojans roared out in response.                                            \
          The fools! Pallas Athena had robbed them of their wits.\
[390] They all applauded Hector\'92s disastrous tactics.                                      \
          No one praised Polydamas, who\'92d advised them well.\
          Then throughout the army they ate their dinner.\
          \
          Meanwhile, Achaeans mourned Patroclus all night long\
          with their elegies. Among them, Peleus\'92 son\
          began the urgent lamentations, placing\
          his murderous hands on the chest of his companion,\
          with frequent heavy groans, like a bearded lion,\
          when a deer hunter in dense forest steals its cubs\'97\
          the lion comes back later, then sick at heart                                                       \
[400] roams through the many clearings in the forest,                                    \
          tracking the man\'92s footprints, in hopes of finding him,\
          as bitter anger overwhelms the beast\'97just like that\
          Achilles, amid his groans, addressed his Myrmidons:\
          \
          \'93Alas, what a useless promise I made then,\
          the day I tried to cheer Menoetius up\
          at home, telling him when I\'92d sacked Ilion,\
          I\'92d bring his splendid son back there to him,\
          in Opoeis, and with his share of trophies.\
          But Zeus does not bring to fulfilment\
[410] all things which men propose. Now both of us                              \
          share a common fate, to redden the same earth\
          right here in Troy. Old horseman Peleus                                                    \
          will not be welcoming me at my return\
          back to his home, nor will my mother Thetis.\
          For in this place the earth will cover me.\
          And now, Patroclus, since I\'92m journeying\
          under the earth after you, I\'92ll postpone\
          your burial till I bring here Hector\'92s head,\
          his armour, too, the man who slaughtered you,\
[420] you courageous man. I\'92ll cut the throats                                         \
          of twelve fine Trojan children on your pyre,\
          in my anger at your killing. Till that time,\
          you\'92ll lie like this with me by my beaked ships,\
          and round you Trojan and Dardanian women\
          will keep lamenting night and day, shedding tears,                                  \
          the very women we two worked hard to win\
          with our strength and our long spears, by looting\
          prosperous cities of mortal men.\'94\
          \
          After these words, godlike Achilles told his comrades\
[430] to place a large tripod on the fire, so they could wash                           \
          the blood clots from his comrade\'92s corpse. On the blazing fire,\
          they set a cauldron with three legs, poured water in it,\
          then brought split wood to burn below the water.\
          Fire licked the cauldron\'92s belly and made the water hot.\
          Once it had boiled inside the shining bronze,\
          they washed him, rubbed oil thickly over him,                                                   \
          and filled his wounds with ointment nine years old.\
          Then they placed Patroclus on a bed, covering him\
          with a fine woollen cloth from head to foot\
[440] and a white cloak on the cloth. Then all night long,                              \
          the Myrmidons around swift-footed Achilles\
          mourned Patroclus with their lamentations.\
          \
          Then Zeus spoke to Hera, his sister and his wife:\
          \
          \'93You\'92ve got what you wanted, ox-eyed queen Hera.\
          Swift-footed Achilles you\'92ve spurred into action.\
          From your own womb you must have given birth\
          to these long-haired Achaeans.\'94                                                \
          \
          Ox-eyed queen Hera\
          then replied to Zeus:                                                                                                                       \
          \
          \'93Most dread son of Cronos,\
          what are you saying? Even a human man,\
[450] though mortal and ignorant of what I know,                                  \
          can achieve what he intends for someone else.\
          And men say I\'92m the finest of all goddesses\
          in a double sense\'97both by my lineage\
          and my marriage to the ruler of the gods.\
          So why should I not bring an evil fortune\
          on these Trojans when they\'92ve made me angry?\'94\
          \
          Thus these two conversed with one another then.\
          \
          Meanwhile, silver-footed Thetis reached Hephaestus\'92 home.\
          Made of eternal bronze and gleaming like a star,                                               \
[460] it stood out among the homes of the immortals.                                   \
          The crippled god had constructed it himself.\
          She found him working with his bellows, moving round,\
          sweating in his eager haste. He was forging\
          twenty tripods in all, to stand along the walls\
          of his well-built house. Under the legs of each one\
          he had fitted golden wheels, so every tripod\
          might move all on its own into a gathering of the gods\
          at his command and then return to his own house.\
          They were wonderful to look at. His work on them\
[470] had reached the stage where finely crafted handles                               \
          had still not been attached. He was making these,\
          forging the rivets. As he was working on them                                                   \
          with his great skill, silver-footed goddess Thetis\
          approached more closely. Noticing her, Charis,\
          lovely goddess with the splendid veil, came forward\'97\
          she was wife to the celebrated crippled god.\
          Taking Thetis by the hand, she called her name, and said:\
          \
          \'93Long-robed Thetis, why visit our house now?\
          You\'92re a welcome and respected guest, but to this point\
[480] you haven\'92t come by very much. Do step inside.                           \
          Let me show you our hospitality.\'94\
          \
          With these words, the goddess led her inside the house.\
          She asked Thetis to sit in a silver-studded chair,\
          beautifully finished, with a footstool under it.                                                   \
          Then she called the famous artisan Hephaestus:           \
          \
          \'93Come here, Hephaestus. Thetis needs to see you.\'94\
          \
          The celebrated lame god then replied to Charis:\
          \
          \'93Here\'92s a fearful honoured goddess in my home,\
          the one who saved me when I was in pain,\
[490] after my great fall, thanks to my mother,                                       \
          that shameless one, eager to conceal me,\
          because I was a cripple. At that time,\
          I would have suffered heartfelt agonies,\
          if Thetis and Eurynome, daughter\
          of circling Ocean stream, had not taken me\
          into their hearts. With those two, for nine years                                       \
          I made many lovely things\'97brooches,\
          spiral bracelets, earrings, necklaces\'97\
          inside their hollow cave. The Ocean stream\
[500] flowed round me, always with the roar of surf.                              \
          No one else knew, neither god nor mortal man.\
          But Thetis and Eurynome\'97the ones\
          who rescued me\'97they knew.* And now Thetis\
          has come into my home. So I must give her\
          full recompense\'97fair-haired Thetis saved my life.\
          But Charis, show her now our hospitality.\
          I\'92ll put away my bellows and my tools.\'94\
          \
          Huge god Hephaestus got up from the anvil block                                            \
[510] with laboured breathing. He was lame, but his thin legs                      \
          moved quickly under him. He placed his bellows\
          far from the fire and collected all his work tools,\
          then stored them in a silver chest. With a sponge,\
          he wiped his face, both hands, thick neck, and hairy chest.\
          Then he pulled on a tunic and came limping out,\
          gripping a sturdy staff. At once he was helped along\
          by female servants made of gold, who moved to him.\
          They look like living servant girls, possessing minds,\
          hearts with intelligence, vocal chords, and strength.\
[520] They learned to work from the immortal gods.                                                 \
          These women served to give their master detailed help.\
          Hephaestus came limping up to Thetis and sat down\
          in a shining chair. Then, clasping her hand, he spoke:\
          \
          \'93Long-robed Thetis, why have you come here,\
          to our house, an honoured welcome guest?\
          To this point, you haven\'92t come here often.\
          But say what\'92s on your mind. My heart tells me\
          I shall do it, if I can accomplish it,\
          if it\'92s something that can be carried out.\'94\
          \
          Thetis answered him in tears:                                   \
          \
[530] \'93Oh, Hephaestus,                                                          \
          is there any goddess on Olympus\
          who\'92s suffered so much painful sorrow                                                       \
          in her heart to equal the unhappiness\
          that Zeus, son of Cronos, loads on me\
          more than any other god? Of all goddesses\
          living in the sea, he made me subject\
          to a mortal man, Peleus, son of Aeacus.\
          So I had to put up with a man in bed,\
          though much against my will. Now he lies there,\
[540] in his home, worn out by harsh old age.                                          \
          And I have still more pain. He gave me a son\
          to bear and raise as an outstanding warrior.\
          The boy grew up as quickly as a sapling.\
          Then, when I had reared him like a tree\
          in a fertile garden, I sent him off\
          in the beaked ships to fight at Ilion\
          against the Trojans. I\'92ll never welcome him                                               \
          returning home to the house of Peleus.\
          And while he still lives to glimpse the sunlight,\
[550] he lives in sorrow. When I visit him,                                               \
          I cannot help him. Achaea\'92s sons chose for him\
          as his prize a girl, whom great Agamemnon\
          seized right out of his arms. In grief for her,\
          his heart has pined away. Then the Trojans\
          penned Achaeans in by their ships\'92 sterns,\
          not letting them come out. The senior men\
          among the Argives pleaded with my son.\
          They promised splendid gifts. But he refused,                                           \
          declining to protect them from disaster.\
[560] But then he sent Patroclus to the war,                                             \
          dressing him in his own armour, providing\
          a force of many men. They fought all day\
          around the Scaean Gates, and that very day\
          would have utterly destroyed the city,\
          if Apollo had not killed Menoetius\'92 son,\
          after he\'92d inflicted bloody carnage.\
          He killed him at the front, giving Hector\
          all the glory. That\'92s why I\'92ve come here now,\
          asking at your knees if you\'92d be willing\
[570] to give my son, who is fated to die soon,                                        \
          a shield, helmet, good leg armour fitted\
          with ankle clasps, and body armour, too.\
          His previous equipment was all taken                                                        \
          when Trojans killed his loyal companion.\
          Now my son lies in the dust, heart filled with pain.\'94\
          \
          The famous crippled god then answered Thetis:\
          \
          \'93Cheer up. Don\'92t let these things afflict your heart.\
          I wish I could hide him from distressful death,\
          when his cruel fate arrives, as surely\
[580] as I know there\'92ll be fine armour for him\'97                                    \
          such splendid armour that it will astound\
          all the many men who chance to see it.\'94\
          \
          With these words, Hephaestus left her there, going to start\
          his bellows. He directed them right at the fire,\
          then told them to start working. So the bellows,\
          twenty in all, started blowing on the crucibles,                                                  \
          each one emitting just the right amount of air,\
          sometimes blowing hard to help when he was busy,\
          sometimes gently, whatever way Hephaestus wished,\
[590] so his work could go ahead. He threw on the fire                                   \
          enduring bronze and tin, precious gold and silver.\
          Next, he placed the great anvil on its block, took up\
          a massive hammer in one hand and in the other his tongs.\
          \
          The first thing he created was a huge and sturdy shield,\
          all wonderfully crafted. Around its outer edge,\
          he fixed a triple rim, glittering in the light,                                                         \
          attaching to it a silver carrying strap.\
          The shield had five layers. On the outer one,\
          with his great skill he fashioned many rich designs.\
[600] There he hammered out the earth, the heavens, the sea,                      \
          the untiring sun, the moon at the full, along with\
          every constellation which crowns the heavens\'97\
          the Pleiades, the Hyades, mighty Orion,\
          and the Bear, which some people call the Wain,\
          always circling in the same position, watching Orion,\
          the only stars that never bathe in Ocean stream.*\
          \
          Then he created two splendid cities of mortal men.                                          \
          In one, there were feasts and weddings. By the light\
          of blazing torches, people were leading the brides\
[610] out from their homes and through the town to loud music                  \
          of the bridal song. There were young lads dancing,\
          whirling to the constant tunes of flutes and lyres,\
          while all the women stood beside their doors, staring\
          in admiration.                                   \
          \
          Then the people gathered\
          in the assembly, for a dispute had taken place.\
          Two men were arguing about blood-money owed\
          for a murdered man. One claimed he\'92d paid in full,\
          setting out his case before the people, but the other                                         \
          was refusing any compensation. Both were keen\
[620] to receive the judgment from an arbitration.                                          \
          The crowd there cheered them on, some supporting one,\
          some the other, while heralds kept the throng controlled.\
          Meanwhile, elders were sitting there on polished stones\
          in the sacred circle, holding in their hands\
          the staffs they\'92d taken from the clear-voiced heralds.\
          With those they\'92d stand up there and render judgment,\
          each in his turn. In the centre lay two golden talents,\
          to be awarded to the one among them all\
          who would deliver the most righteous verdict.\
          \
[630] The second city was surrounded by two armies,                                     \
          soldiers with glittering weapons. They were discussing                                    \
          two alternatives, each one pleasing some of them\'97\
          whether to attack that city and plunder it,\
          or to accept as payment half of all the goods\
          contained in that fair town. But those under siege\
          who disagreed were arming for a secret ambush.\
          Their dear wives and children stood up on the walls\
          as a defence, along with those too old to fight.\
          The rest were leaving, led on by Pallas Athena\
[640] and Ares, both made of gold, dressed in golden clothes,                       \
          large, beautiful, and armed\'97as is suitable for gods.\
          They stood out above the smaller people with them.\
          When the soldiers reached a spot which seemed all right\
          for ambush, a place beside a river where the cattle                                            \
          came to drink, they stopped there, covered in shining bronze.\
          Two scouts were stationed some distance from that army,\
          waiting to catch sight of sheep and short-horned cattle.\
          These soon appeared, followed by two herdsmen\
          playing their flutes and not anticipating any danger.\
[650] But those lying in ambush saw them and rushed out,                           \
          quickly cutting off the herds of cattle and fine flocks\
          of white-fleeced sheep, killing the herdsmen with them.\
          When the besiegers sitting in their meeting place                                             \
          heard the great commotion coming from the cattle,\
          they quickly climbed up behind their prancing horses\
          and set out. They soon caught up with those attackers.\
          Then they organized themselves for battle and fought\
          along the river banks, men hitting one another\
          with bronze-tipped spears. Strife and Confusion joined the fight,\
[660] along with cruel Death, who seized one wounded man                         \
          while still alive and then another man without a wound,\
          while pulling the feet of one more corpse from the fight.\
          The clothes Death wore around her shoulders were dyed red\
          with human blood. They even joined the slaughter\
          as living mortals, fighting there and hauling off\
          the bodies of dead men which each of them had killed.                                    \
          \
          On that shield Hephaestus next set a soft and fallow field,\
          fertile spacious farmland, which had been ploughed three times.\
          Many labourers were wheeling ploughs across it,\
[670] moving back and forth. As they reached the field\'92s edge,                      \
          they turned, and a man came up to offer them\
          a cup of wine as sweet as honey. Then they\'92d turn back,\
          down the furrow, eager to move through that deep soil\
          and reach the field\'92s edge once again. The land behind them\
          was black, looking as though it had just been ploughed,\
          though it was made of gold\'97an amazing piece of work!\
          \
          Then he pictured on the shield a king\'92s landed estate,                                      \
          where harvesters were reaping corn, using sharp sickles.\
          Armfuls of corn were falling on the ground in rows,\
[680] one after the other. Binders were tying them up                                    \
          in sheaves with twisted straw. Three binders stood there.\
          Behind the reapers, boys were gathering the crop,\
          bringing it to sheaf-binders, keeping them busy\
          Among them stood the king, a sceptre in his hand,\
          there by the stubble, saying nothing, but with pleasure\
          in his heart. Some distance off, under an oak tree,\
          heralds were setting up a feast, dressing a huge ox\
          which they\'92d just killed. Women were sprinkling white barley\
          on the meat in large amounts for the workers\'92 meal.                                         \
          \
[690] Next, Hephaestus placed on that shield a vineyard,                              \
          full of grapes made of splendid gold. The grapes were black,\
          the poles supporting vines throughout were silver.\
          Around it, he made a ditch of blue enamel,\
          around that, a fence of tin. A single path led in,\
          where the grape pickers came and went at harvest time.\
          Young girls and carefree lads with wicker baskets\
          were carrying off a crop as sweet as honey.\
          In the middle of them all, a boy with a clear-toned lyre\
          played pleasant music, singing the Song of Linos,                                              \
[700] in his delicate fine voice. His comrades kept time,                                \
          beating the ground behind him, singing and dancing.*\
          \
          Then he set on the shield a herd of straight-horned cattle,\
          with cows crafted out of gold and tin. They were lowing\
          as they hurried out from farm to pasture land,\
          beside a rippling river lined with waving reeds.\
          The herdsmen walking by the cattle, four of them,\
          were also made of gold. Nine swift-footed dogs\
          ran on behind. But there, at the front of the herd,\
          two fearful lions had seized a bellowing bull.                                                     \
[710] They were dragging him off, as he roared aloud.                                    \
          The dogs and young men were chasing after them.\
          The lions, after ripping open the great ox\'92s hide,\
          were gorging on its entrails, on its black blood,\
          as herdsmen kept trying in vain to chase them off,\
          setting their swift dogs on them. But, fearing the lions,\
          the dogs kept turning back before they nipped them,\
          and stood there barking, close by but out of reach.\
          \
          Then the famous crippled god created there a pasture\
          in a lovely valley bottom, an open ground\
[720] for white-fleeced sheep, sheep folds, roofed huts, and pens.                \
          \
          Next on that shield, the celebrated lame god made                                           \
          an elaborately crafted dancing floor, like the one\
          Daedalus created long ago in spacious Cnossus,\
          for Ariadne with the lovely hair.* On that floor,\
          young men and women whose bride price would require\
          many cattle were dancing, holding onto one another\
          by the wrists. The girls wore fine linen dresses,\
          the men lightly rubbed with oil wore woven tunics.\
          On their heads the girls had lovely flower garlands.\
[730] The men were carrying gold daggers on silver straps.                            \
          They turned with such a graceful ease on skilful feet,\
          just as a potter sits with a wheel between his hands,                                        \
          testing it, to make sure that it runs smoothly.\
          Then they would line up and run towards each other.\
          A large crowd stood around, enjoying the dancing magic,\
          as in the middle two acrobats led on the dance,\
          springing, and whirling, and tumbling.\
          \
          On that shield, Hephaestus then depicted Ocean,\
          the mighty river, flowing all around the outer edge.\
          \
[740] When he\'92d created that great and sturdy shield,                                     \
          he fashioned body armour brighter than blazing fire,                                        \
          a heavy helmet shaped to fit Achilles\'92 temples,\
          beautiful and finely worked, with a gold crest on top.\
          Then he made him leg guards of finely hammered tin.\
          \
          When the famous lame god had made all the armour,\
          he took it and set it there before Achilles\'92 mother.\
          Then, like a hawk, she sped down from Olympus,\
          carrying the gleaming armour of Hephaestus.}