{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf460
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural\qc

\f0\fs24 \cf0 Book Nineteen\
Achilles and Agamemnon\
          \

\i [Thetis brings the divine armour to Achilles; Achilles summons an assembly of Achaeans; Achilles and Agamemnon are reconciled; Agamemnon explains the origin of his folly; Odysseus urges Achilles to eat, Achilles refuses; Agamemnon gets his gifts for Achilles brought to the assembly; Agamemnon swears he has not touched Briseis; Briseis laments over the corpse of Patroclus; the elders continue to mourn Patroclus; Zeus sends Athena to help Achilles deal with his hunger; the troops move out to battle again; Achilles speaks to his horses, who prophesy his death]
\i0 \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural
\cf0           \
          When Dawn in her yellow robe rose from Ocean\'92s stream,\
          bringing her light to immortal gods and mortal men,\
          Thetis reached the ships bearing Hephaestus\'92 gifts.\
          She found her dear son lying beside Patroclus,\
          crying bitterly. Many of his companions\
          mourned around him. The noble goddess went to them.\
          Standing by Achilles, she clasped his hand, then said:\
          \
          \'93My son, we must let this man lie here\
          for all our grief. He\'92s dead once and for all.\
  [10] It\'92s the gods\'92 will. Now you must accept                                         \
          this splendid armour from Hephaestus\'97                                                   \
          no man has ever had such gorgeous armour\
          to wear around his shoulders.\'94\
          \
          With these words,\
          the goddess set the armour down before Achilles.\
          The wonderfully crafted metal rang out loudly.\
          Fear gripped all the Myrmidons. Not one of them\
          dared look directly at those weapons. They shrank away.\
          But when Achilles saw them, his anger grew.\
          His eyes glared underneath his eyelids, like a fire\'97\
  [20] a terrifying light. But as his hands went over                                          \
          the god\'92s priceless gifts, he felt great joy. He gazed at them,\
          filling his heart with pleasure at the rich designs.\
          Then he spoke to his mother\'97his words had wings:                                         \
          \
          \'93Mother, this armour the god has given me\
          is a work fit for the immortals, something\
          no living human could create. So now,\
          I\'92ll arm myself for war. In the meantime,\
          I have a dreadful fear that flies may burrow\
          into those wounds carved by the slicing bronze\
  [30] in the body of Menoetius\'92 noble son.                                               \
          They may breed worms in him, defile his corpse,\
          now that the life in him is gone. If so,\
          all his flesh will fester.\'94\
          \
          Then Thetis,\
          goddess with the silver feet, answered Achilles:\
          \
          \'93My child, don\'92t let such things distress your heart.\
          I\'92ll make the effort to protect him here                                                       \
          from those cruel swarms of flies which feed\
          on warriors who\'92ve been killed in battle.\
          Even if he lies here an entire year,\
  [40] his flesh will stay just as it is or better.                                           \
          But you must summon the Achaean warriors\
          to assembly, to renounce your anger\
          with Agamemnon, his people\'92s shepherd.\
          After that, arm yourself for battle quickly\'97\
          clothe yourself in all your fighting strength.\'94\
          \
          Saying this, Thetis filled him with fearless power.\
          Then she inserted ambrosia and red nectar\
          into Patroclus, through his nostrils, so his flesh\
          would stay uncorrupted.\
          \
          But Achilles, like a god,                                         \
  [50] strode down along the seashore, raising fearful shouts,                        \
          stirring Achaean warriors into action.\
          So even those who up to now used to remain\
          with the assembled ships\'97helmsmen who worked\
          ships\'92 steering oars and stewards who stayed with the ships\
          rationing provisions\'97these men all showed up\
          for the assembly, because Achilles had appeared\
          after his long absence from that painful war.\
          Two associates of the war god Ares came in limping,\
          the brave offspring of Tydeus and lord Odysseus,\
  [60] leaning on their spears\'97their wounds still pained them.                     \
          They came and sat down at the front of the assembly.                                      \
          Last to arrive was Agamemnon, king of men,\
          still suffering from the wound Co\'f6n had given him,\
          Antenor\'92s son, who in deadly conflict stabbed him\
          with his bronze-tipped spear. Once all Achaeans\
          were assembled, swift-footed Achilles rose to speak:\
          \
          \'93Son of Atreus, has it been good for us,\
          for you and me, to continue squabbling\
          in a heart-rending quarrel full of grief\
  [70] for both of us, over some girl? I wish                                               \
          she\'92d been killed by Artemis\'92 arrow\
          right beside my ships, the day I got her\
          as my prize, after we destroyed Lyrnessus.                                                 \
          Fewer Achaeans would have sunk their teeth\
          into this wide earth at enemy hands,\
          if I\'92d not been so angry. That\'92s really helped\
          lord Hector and his Trojans. But Achaeans,\
          will, I think, long recall this argument\
          you and I have had. Still, though it hurts,\
  [80] we should let all this pass, repressing hearts                                     \
          within our chests\'97we must do that. So now,\
          I end my anger. It\'92s not appropriate\
          for me to remain enraged for ever.\
          But come, quickly urge long-haired Achaeans\
          on to battle, so I may go out once again\
          to face the Trojans and see if they still wish                                              \
          to spend the night beside our ships. I think\
          many of them will be glad to get some rest,\
          the ones who escape this deadly warfare\
          and who evade my spear.\'94\
          \
  [90] Achilles finished speaking.                                      \
          The well-armed Achaeans then were full of joy\
          that Peleus\'92 great-hearted son had set aside\
          his anger. Next, Agamemnon, king of men,\
          addressed them:\
          \
          \'93My friends, Danaan warriors,\
          companions of the war god Ares, it\'92s good\
          to listen to a man who\'92s standing up\
          to speak and not to interrupt him.\
          That makes things difficult, even for a man                                               \
          skilled in speaking. When men all shout at once,\
[100] how can any one speak up or listen?                                                \
          Even a clear-voiced speaker gets upset.\
          I\'92m going to address the son of Peleus,\
          but you other Argives pay attention\'97\
          let every one of you mark my words well.\
          You Achaeans have often criticized\
          and spoken ill of me. But I\'92m not to blame.\
          It\'92s Zeus\'92 fault and Fate\'97those Furies, too,\
          who walk in darkness. In our assembly,\
          they cast a savage blindness on my heart,\
[110] that day when on my own I took away                                            \
          Achilles\'92 prize. But what was I to do?                                                          \
          It is a god who brought all this about.\
          Zeus\'92 eldest daughter, Ate, blinds all men\
          with her destructive power. Her feet are soft,\
          she walks, not on the ground, but on men\'92s heads,\
          and she brings folly onto humankind,\
          seducing them at random. Even Zeus,\
          who they say is the greatest of the gods\
          and men, was blinded by her, when Hera,\
[120] a mere female, with her cunning tactics,                                         \
          deceived him that very day Alcmene\
          was to give birth to mighty Hercules,\
          in Thebes, city with the splendid walls.\
          Zeus then boasted openly to all the gods,                                                   \
          \
          \'91Listen to me, you gods and goddesses,\
          so I can say what the heart inside me bids.\
          The goddess of childbirth, Eileithyia,\
          today brings into the sun\'92s light a man\
          who will rule all those who live around him,\
[130] one of the race of men with my blood in them.\'92                          \
          \
          But then that deceitful lady Hera said to Zeus,\
          \
          \'91You\'92re not being candid. You don\'92t really mean\
          what you now say. So come, Olympian,\
          swear a binding oath for me that the man\
          who falls out today between a woman\'92s feet                                           \
          will, in fact, rule those who live around him,\
          one of the race of men with your blood in them.\'92\
          \
          That\'92s what she said. Zeus didn\'92t see the trick.\
          He swore a binding oath in his great blindness.\
[140] Hera then left that peak on Mount Olympus.                                \
          Darting off, she quickly came to Argos,\
          in Achaea, where she knew the strong wife\
          of Sthenelus, Perseus\'92 son, was pregnant\
          with a son, in her seventh month. This child\
          Hera induced into the light before its term.\
          She then delayed Alcmene\'92s childbirth,\
          getting the Eileithyiae to hold it back.\
          Then she brought the news to Zeus, Cronos\'92 son,                                      \
          saying,\
          \
          \'91Father Zeus, lord of bright lightning,\
[150] I\'92ll tell you my heartfelt news. Just now,                                      \
          a noble man was born who\'92ll rule the Argives,\
          Eurystheus, son of Sthenelus, Perseus\'92 son,\
          of your own lineage. So it\'92s fitting\
          he should become king of all the Argives.\'92\
          \
          When Hera said that, sharp pain seized Zeus\
          deep in his heart. He seized Ate at once\
          by the shining hair wound round her head.\
          His heart was furious. He swore a great oath\
          that Ate, who blinds everyone, would no more\
[160] come to Olympus or to starry heaven.                                                       \
          That said, in one hand he swung her round,\
          then flung her clear out of the star-filled skies.\
          She quickly landed among toiling men.\
          Whenever Zeus saw his dear son Hercules\
          carrying out menial work in all his labours\
          for Eurystheus, he\'92d always groan aloud,\
          thinking of Ate. That\'92s how I was, too,\
          when great Hector of the shining helmet\
          was killing Argives off at the ships\'92 sterns.\
[170] I could not forget Ate, who blinded me                                           \
          when all this started. But since I was blind,\
          since Zeus robbed me of my wits, I will agree\
          to make amends, to give priceless gifts.\
          But prepare yourself for battle, rouse up\
          all your other men. As for me, I\'92m ready\
          to give every gift which lord Odysseus                                                        \
          promised you in your hut yesterday.\
          Or, if you prefer, don\'92t turn right now to war.\
          Though you\'92re keen to go, let my servants fetch\
[180] those presents from my ship and bring them here,                       \
          so you can see if you approve of them.\'94\
          \
          Swift-footed Achilles then answered Agamemnon:\
          \
          \'93Most glorious son of Atreus, Agamemnon,\
          king of men, if you wish to give me presents,\
          as is appropriate, or to withhold them,\
          that\'92s up to you. Now we must think of war,\
          and with all speed. We should not be wasting time\
          in conversation or with such delays.\
          We have great work to do, so once again                                                    \
[190] men see Achilles with the front-line warriors,                               \
          destroying Trojan ranks with his bronze spear.\
          Keep this in mind when you confront your man.\'94\
          \
          Resourceful Odysseus then addressed Achilles:\
          \
          \'93Though you\'92re a brave man, god-like Achilles,\
          don\'92t encourage Achaea\'92s sons to fight\
          against the Trojans on empty stomachs.\
          If so, the fight won\'92t last for long if troops\
          engage right now, once some god infuses strength\
          into both sides. No. Instruct Achaeans\
[200] to have some food and wine by their swift ships.                                    \
          For they give strength and courage. No soldier\
          can fight the enemy all day till sunset\
          without some food. However fierce his heart\
          may be for battle, his limbs grow heavy\
          without his knowledge. Once thirst and hunger\
          overtake him, his knees get tired as he moves.\
          But the man who\'92s had sufficient food and wine\
          fights all day long against his enemies\
          with a courageous heart. His limbs don\'92t tire\
[210] until all warriors have left the battle.                                                         \
          So dismiss your men. Tell them to make a meal.\
          Let Agamemnon, king of men, present his gifts,\
          so all Achaeans here in our assembly\
          can see them first hand and delight your heart.\
          Let him stand up there among the Argives,\
          swear an oath to you he\'92s never climbed\
          in that girl\'92s bed to have sex with her,\
          as is usual, my lord, with men and women.\
          Let the heart in your own chest be open\
[220] to reconciliation. Then, Agamemnon                                              \
          should offer you a fine and pleasing dinner\
          in his hut, so there\'92ll be nothing due to you\
          which remains unsatisfied. As for you,                                                        \
          son of Atreus, you should be more righteous\
          with others from now on. There\'92s no shame\
          when a king pays someone compensation,\
          if the king was the first to lose his temper.\'94\
          \
          Agamemnon, king of men, answered Odysseus:\
          \
          \'93Son of Laertes, I am glad to hear\
[230] what you\'92ve just said. You\'92ve explained this well,                         \
          exploring all these matters very fairly.\
          I\'92m prepared to swear the oath, as my heart bids,\
          and, before the gods, I\'92ll not swear falsely.\
          But let Achilles stay here a little while,\
          though he desires to fight, and let others\
          stay gathered here, until the gifts are brought                                           \
          out of my hut and we can sacrifice\
          to seal our oaths. To you I assign this task\'97\
          select from the entire Achaean force\
[240] the five best young men to carry from my ships                            \
          all those gifts we promised yesterday\
          to give Achilles\'97that includes the woman.\
          Let Talthybius at once prepare for me\
          in the middle of this wide Achaean camp\
          a sacrificial boar to offer up\
          to Zeus and Helios, god of the sun.\'94\
          \
          Swift-footed Achilles then replied to Agamemnon:\
          \
          \'93Mighty son of Atreus, Agamemnon,\
          ruler of men, it would be far better                                                              \
[250] to worry about all this some other time,                                        \
          when there\'92s a let up in the fight, when the heart\
          here in my chest is less enraged. For now,\
          all those killed by Hector, son of Priam,\
          when Zeus gave him glory, are lying there,\
          all mangled, and you are urging us to eat!\
          For my part, I\'92d lead Achaea\'92s sons to war\
          right now, unfed, with empty stomachs,\
          then at sunset make them a great dinner,\
          when we\'92ve avenged our shame. Until that time,\
[260] no drink or food will pass my throat, at least,                                         \
          while my dead comrade lies inside my hut,\
          mutilated by sharp bronze, with his feet\
          still pointing at the door, while his companions\
          mourn there around him. That\'92s why my heart\
          cannot concern itself with what you\'92ve said,\
          only with killing, blood, men\'92s dying groans.\'94\
          \
          To this, resourceful Odysseus then replied:\
          \
          \'93Achilles, Peleus\'92 son, of all Achaeans\
          the mightiest by far. You\'92re stronger than me,\
[270] more than a little better with your spear,                                       \
          but I might say I\'92m far better with advice,\
          since I\'92m older and know more. So your heart\
          should listen now to what I have to say.                                                     \
          In battle men quickly have enough, for there\
          bronze slices piles of straw onto the ground,\
          but there\'92s a slender harvest, once Zeus\
          lifts up his scales, establishing for men\
          the outcome of the battle. Achaeans\
          cannot mourn a corpse by eating nothing.\
[280] Too many men are dying every day,                                                 \
          one after another. When would anyone\
          get some relief from fasting? No, the dead\
          we must bury, then mourn a single day,\
          hardening our hearts. But those who do survive                                        \
          grim battle must remember food and drink,\
          so we can fight our enemies once more,\
          on and on incessantly, covering our flesh\
          with bronze which never tires. So let no soldier\
          hang back, waiting for another call to war.\
[290] This is the call, and things will not go well                                    \
          for anyone left at Achaean ships.\
          Let\'92s all set off together as one army,\
          taking cruel war to those horse-taming Trojans.\'94\
          \
          Odysseus finished. Then he took along with him\
          splendid Nestor\'92s sons, Meges, son of Phyleus,\
          Thoas, Meriones, and Lycomedes,\
          Creon\'92s son, and Melanippus. They went off                                                       \
          to the huts of Agamemnon, Atreus\'92 son.\
          As soon as they gave out the order, the task was done.\
[300] From the hut they took seven tripods, as he\'92d promised,                      \
          twenty gleaming cauldrons and twelve horses.\
          They quickly led out seven women, all well skilled\
          in lovely handiwork. Eighth came the fair Briseis.\
          Odysseus weighed out a sum of ten gold talents.\
          Then he led them back, with the young Achaean men\
          carrying the gifts. These they placed in the assembly,\
          in the middle of them all. Agamemnon stood up.\
          Talthybius, whose voice was like a god\'92s, was there,                                         \
          by Agamemnon\'92s side, his hands gripping a boar.\
[310] Agamemnon drew out the knife he always wore                                    \
          by his sword\'92s scabbard. He cut hairs from the boar\
          to start the ritual. Lifting up his arms,\
          he prayed to Zeus. Argives all sat in silence,\
          listening to their king with suitable respect,\
          as he gazed up to spacious heaven, saying this prayer:\
          \
          \'93Let Zeus, the loftiest and finest god,\
          first witness, then Sun and the Erinyes,\
          those Furies under the earth who punish                                                    \
          men who\'92ve made false oaths\'97I hereby swear\
[320] I\'92ve never laid a hand on that girl Briseis,                                       \
          either for sex or any other reason.\
          In my huts she stayed untouched. If what I say\
          is not the truth, then let gods punish me\
          with many painful sorrows, the sort they give\
          to men who in their oaths blaspheme them.\'94\
          \
          This said, he cut the boar\'92s throat with the ruthless bronze.\
          Talthybius swung the body round, then threw it\
          in the vast grey sea, food for fish. Then Achilles,\
          standing up, addressed war-loving Argives:\
          \
          \'93Father Zeus,\
[330] you keep afflicting humans with great blindness.                                    \
          For Atreus\'92 son would never make my heart\
          so totally enraged here in my chest,\
          nor would he take that girl away from me,\
          so arbitrarily against my will,\
          if Zeus did not somehow desire the deaths\
          of Argives in large numbers. But now,\
          you should all eat, so we can start the fight.\'94\
          \
          Saying this, Achilles quickly ended the assembly.\
          The men dispersed, each one going off to his own ship.\
[340] Great-hearted Myrmidons looked after all the gifts,                              \
          taking them to godlike Achilles\'92 ship and storing them\
          inside his huts. They left the women there, as well.                                           \
          His noble attendants drove the horses to his herd.\
          \
          Briseis, looking like golden Aphrodite,\
          then saw Patroclus mutilated by sharp bronze.\
          With a cry, she threw herself on him, hands tearing\
          at her breast, her tender neck, her lovely face,\
          fair as a goddess, lamenting:\
          \
          \'93Patroclus,\
          you who brought the utmost joy to my sad heart,\
[350] I left you here alive, when I went off,                                           \
          taken from these huts. But now, at my return,\
          I find you dead, you, the people\'92s leader.\
          Again for me, as always, evil follows evil.                                                   \
          I saw the husband I was given to\
          by my father and my noble mother killed\
          by sharp bronze before our city. My brothers,\
          three of them, whom my own mother bore,\
          whom I loved, have all met their fatal day.\
          But when swift Achilles killed my husband,\
[360] you wouldn\'92t let me weep. You told me then                              \
          you\'92d make me lord Achilles\'92 wedded wife,\
          he\'92d take me in his ships back to Phthia,\
          for a marriage feast among the Myrmidons.\
          You were always gentle. That\'92s the reason\
          I\'92ll never stop this grieving for your death.\'94                                                \
          \
          As Briseis said this, she wept. The women joined her\
          in wailing for Patroclus, although each of them\
          had her own private sorrows. The Achaean elders\
          gathered round Achilles, urging him to eat.\
[370] But he refused, continuing his laments:                                                   \
          \
          \'93If any of my dear companions here\
          wishes to obey me, then I beg you\
          don\'92t ask me to satisfy my heart\
          with food or drink when painful sorrow\
          grips me. I\'92ll remain like this till sunset,\
          enduring everything.\'94\
          \
          Achilles finished speaking.\
          Then he sent away the leaders. But some remained\'97\
          both sons of Atreus, lord Odysseus, Nestor,                                                        \
          Idomeneus, and old horseman Phoenix,\
[380] each trying to console him in his painful grieving.                                 \
          But his heart would find no joy until he\'92d entered\
          the bloody mouth of war. Thinking of Patroclus,\
          he sighed repeatedly, then said:\
          \
          \'93Poor man,\
          most loved of all my comrades, in the past\
          you used to set out tasty meals right here,\
          making them well and quickly in my hut,\
          when we Achaeans were in such a rush\
          to set out against horse-taming Trojans\
          in wretched war. Now you lie disfigured,\
[390] my heart refuses meat and drink, though both                                        \
          are in this hut, because I miss you so.\
          I could suffer nothing worse than this,\
          not even if I learned my father\'92s died\'97\
          he must be shedding gentle tears in Phthia,\
          missing a son like me, while I stay here\
          among strange people, fighting Trojans\
          over Helen, whom I detest, or if I heard\
          my dear son had died, who\'92s being raised for me\
          on Scyros, if, in fact, he\'92s still alive,\
[400] godlike Neoptolemus.* Up to now,                                              \
          the heart here in my chest hoped I alone\
          would perish here in Troy, so far from Argos,\
          where horses breed. You\'92d return to Phthia,                                               \
          taking my child in your swift black ship\
          away from Scyros, show him all my things,\
          possessions, servants, my high-roofed palace.\
          For by now Peleus is either dead and gone,\
          I must assume, or just barely living,\
          afflicted with hateful old age, waiting\
[410] all the time for distressful news of me,                                           \
          when he finds out that I have died.\'94\
          \
          As he spoke, Achilles wept. The elders also mourned,\
          each one remembering what he had left at home.\
          As they lamented, the son of Cronos saw them.                                                 \
          Feeling pity for them, Zeus spoke to Athena\'97\
          his words had wings:\
          \
          \'93My child, here\'92s a man\
          you seem to be neglecting totally,\
          a special favourite of yours\'97Achilles.\
          Does your heart no longer care for him at all?\
[420] There he sits in front of his beaked ships,                                        \
          mourning his dear companion. Other men\
          have all gone off to dinner, but he\'92s fasting\
          and won\'92t eat. Go now. Put into his chest\
          some nectar and beautiful ambrosia,\
          so hunger won\'92t consume him.\'94\
          \
          With these words,\
          Zeus spurred Athena, already eager, into action.\
          She swooped down through the air, screaming shrilly,                                      \
          like a broad-winged hawk. Then as Achaeans, with all speed,\
          armed themselves throughout the camp, she inserted\
[430] nectar and beautiful ambrosia in Achilles\'92 chest,                                    \
          so his limbs would not suffer pangs of hunger.\
          Then she left for her mighty father\'92s well-built home.\
          \
          Achaeans then came swarming out from their fast ships.\
          Just as freezing snowflakes fall thick and fast from Zeus,\
          driven by the raging sky-born North Wind\'97that\'92s how\
          crowds of them streamed out then, pouring from the ships\'97\
          brightly gleaming helmets, strong-plated body armour,\
          ash spears and embossed shields\'97the glitter of it all                                       \
          flashed up to heaven. All around, earth chuckled\
[440] to see that gleaming bronze. A noise like thunder rose,                        \
          drummed by the soldiers\'92 marching feet. Amid them all,\
          noble Achilles armed himself for battle,\
          his teeth clenched, eyes blazing with a fiery light,\
          his heart filled with a sorrow not to be endured.\
          As he pulled on the divine gifts which Hephaestus\
          had made for him, he raged against the Trojans.\
          First, he strapped on his leg armour, beautifully made,\
          fitted with silver ankle clasps. Then on his chest                                                   \
          he fixed the body armour. Around his shoulders,\
[450] he slung his bronze silver-studded sword, then picked up                    \
          his huge strong shield which, like the moon, shone everywhere.\
          Just like the blazing light that sailors glimpse at sea\
          from a fire burning in some isolated farm,\
          high in the mountains, as winds blow them further out,\
          taking them against their will over the fish-filled seas\
          away from loved ones\'97that\'92s how Achilles\'92 shield,\
          so finely crafted, burned out far into the sky.                                                      \
          Then raising the great helmet, he set it on his head.\
          It glittered like a star, that helmet with its horse-hair plumes,\
[460] adorned with the golden hairs Hephaestus placed                                 \
          so thickly round the crest. Noble Achilles,\
          trying out the armour for himself, made sure\
          it fit him so his splendid limbs could move with ease.\
          It was like his own set of wings, lifting him up,\
          this shepherd of his people. Then from its case,\
          he took his father\'92s spear, heavy, huge, and strong.\
          No other Achaean could control that spear.\
          He was the only one with skill enough to wield it.\
          Made of ash wood from the top of Pelion,\
[470] that spear had been given to own his dear father                                             \
          by Cheiron, so he could kill heroic warriors.\
          \
          Automedon and Alcinous kept themselves occupied\
          yoking the horses, tying fine chest straps round them,\
          setting bits inside their jaws, and aligning reins\
          back in the well-made chariot. Taking the shining whip\
          which fit his grip, Automedon jumped in the chariot.\
          Achilles, fully armed, climbed up beside him,\
          his armour gleaming like dazzling Hyperion.\
          Then he called out to those horses of his father,\
          in a terrifying voice:\
          \
[480] \'93Xanthus, Balius,                                                 \
          you famous children of Podarge, this time\
          make sure you bring your charioteer back safely\
          to the Danaan army, once we\'92ve had enough\
          of battle. Don\'92t leave him out there slaughtered,\
          as you did Patroclus.\'94                                    \
          \
          From under the yoke,\
          his swift-footed horse called Xanthus spoke to him,\
          ducking his head down quickly, so all his mane\
          streamed down from underneath his shoulder harness\
          beside the yoke towards the ground. Goddess Hera\
          gave Xanthus power to speak:\
          \
[490] \'93Mighty Achilles,                                \
          on this occasion we will bring you safely back.\
          But the day you\'92ll die is fast approaching.\
          We won\'92t be the cause, but some mighty god                                            \
          and a strong fate. It was not our laziness\
          or lack of speed which helped the Trojans\
          strip that armour from Patroclus\'92 shoulders.\
          A powerful god born to Leto killed him\
          among those fighting at the battle front,\
          then gave Hector glory. The two of us\
[500] could run as quickly as the West Wind\'92s blasts\'97                         \
          men say they are the fastest thing there is\'97\
          your fate still stays the same, to die in war,\
          killed by a mortal and a god.\'94\
          \
          Once Xanthus had said this,\
          the Erinyes removed his voice. Then Achilles,\
          in a fury, said to his horse:\
          \
          \'93Xanthus,\
          why do you prophesy my death? There is no need.                                   \
          I know well enough I\'92m fated to die here,\
          far from my loving parents. No matter.\
          I will not stop till I have driven the Trojans\
[510] to the limit of what they can endure in war.\'94                                 \
          \
          With these words, he drove his sure-footed horses off,\
          speeding forward to the front, screaming as he went.}