{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf460
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural\qc

\f0\fs24 \cf0 Book Twenty\
Achilles Returns to Battle\
          \

\i [As the armies ready for battle, Zeus summons an assembly of gods, tells them they can join the fight on either side; the gods leave Olympus for the battle; Apollo persuades Aeneas to fight Achilles; Aeneas and Achilles confront each other; Aeneas explains his ancestry; Aeneas and Achilles fight; Poseidon saves Aeneas; Achilles starts his slaughter of Trojans; Hector confronts Achilles; Apollo saves Hector; Achilles continues his slaughter]\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\i0 \cf0           \
          Then, son of Peleus, Achaeans armed themselves\
          around you, feeding your boundless appetite for war.\
          On the other side, higher up the sloping plain,\
          the Trojans did the same. At that very moment,\
          from the summit of many-ridged Olympus,\
          Zeus told Themis to summon gods to an assembly.\
          She raced around, calling them to Zeus\'92 home.\
          None of the rivers was left out, except Oceanus,\
          nor any nymph. All those who live in lovely woods,\
  [10] river springs, and grassy meadows came together                                  \
          at cloud-gatherer Zeus\'92 home, seating themselves                                             \
          on porticoes of polished stone, constructed there\
          by Hephaestus\'92 cunning arts for his father Zeus.\
          The gods gathered there in Zeus\'92 house. Poseidon\
          also answered Themis\'92 summons, coming from the sea\
          to join them. He sat in the middle of them all,\
          asking about Zeus\'92 purposes:\
          \
          \'93Lord of bright lightning,\
          why have you called gods to this assembly?\
          Are you concerned for Trojans and Achaeans?\
  [20] Right now their fight is close to flaring up                                               \
          into a total war.\'94\
          \
          Cloud-gatherer Zeus\
          then said to Poseidon in reply:\
          \
          \'93You understand, Earthshaker,                                            \
          the plans here in my chest, the reasons why\
          I\'92ve summoned you. Yes, I am concerned for them.\
          Though they are being destroyed, I\'92ll stay here,\
          sitting on a ridge of Mount Olympus.\
          From here I\'92ll look on to my heart\'92s content.\
          But all the rest of you can go away\
          to join Trojans and Achaeans, helping\
  [30] either side, as your spirits each dictate.                                                   \
          For if we leave Achilles there alone\
          to fight the Trojans, they\'92ll not hold out\
          against the swift-footed son of Peleus,\
          not even briefly. In earlier days,\
          if they saw him, their fear would make them shake,\
          and now his heart\'92s so terribly enraged\
          for his companion, I fear he may go\
          beyond what Fate ordains and storm the walls.\'94                                                    \
          \
          With these words, Cronos\'92 son then launched relentless war.\
  [40] The gods charged off to battle, their hearts divided                               \
          in two groups. Hera went to the assembled ships,\
          with Pallas Athena and Poseidon, who shakes the earth.\
          Helper Hermes accompanied them as well, the god\
          with the most cunning mind of all. Hephaestus\
          also went along with them, exulting in his power.\
          Though he was lame, his feet moved quickly under him.\
          Ares with the shining helmet joined the Trojans,\
          taking with him long-haired Phoebus, archer Artemis,\
          Leto, Xanthus, and laughter-loving Aphrodite.*                                             \
          \
  [50] As long as the gods were far away from mortal men,                             \
          Achaeans won the glory, since Achilles\
          had come back, after staying away from war so long.\
          For every Trojan\'92s limbs were seized with trembling fear\
          when they observed him there, swift son of Peleus\
          in that blazing armour, like man-killing Ares.\
          But once Olympians mingled in the crowds of soldiers,\
          then mighty Strife, who stirs men up in battle,\
          went into action, while Athena kept on shouting,\
          sometimes standing by the ditch they\'92d dug beyond the wall,\
  [60] sometimes yelling out beside the roaring sea shore.                                         \
          On the other side, like a black whirlwind, Ares\
          kept shouting out his piercing orders to the Trojans,\
          sometimes from the city heights, sometimes as he raced\
          along the banks of Simois to Callicolone.*\
          Thus, sacred gods spurred both sides on, urging them\
          to war, inciting cruel conflict. From on high,\
          the father of gods and men thundered ominously,\
          while Poseidon shook the vast earth under them\
          and lofty mountain crests. All the lower slopes of Ida,\
  [70] with its many springs, trembled, as did the peaks,                                 \
          the Trojan city, and Achaean ships. Under the earth,                                     \
          the king of the dead, Aidoneus, was terrified.* \
          He leapt up from his throne afraid and shouting,\
          frightened that Earthshaker Poseidon would split up\
          the earth above him and reveal to gods and men\
          the dark and dreadful habitations of the dead,\
          which even gods detest, so massive was the shock\
          when gods collided in that war, with Poseidon\
          matched against Apollo with his feathered arrows,\
  [80] glittery eyed Athena going against a mighty god,                                   \
          Ares Enyalius, and Hera against Artemis,                                                            \
          with her golden arrows, goddess of the noisy hunt,\
          sister of Apollo, god who shoots from far away.\
          Strong Helper Hermes was opposed by Leto,\
          and Hephaestus by that huge and swirling river\
          the gods call Xanthus, but all men name Scamander.\
          So the gods went out to battle other gods.\
          \
          But of all warriors in that fighting crowd, Achilles\
          was most eager to meet Hector, son of Priam.\
  [90] His spirit urged him to glut Ares, warrior god                                        \
          with the bull\'92s hide shield, on Hector\'92s blood, more so\
          than on the blood of any other man. But Apollo,\
          who inspires men to fight, sent out Aeneas\
          to confront the son of Peleus directly.                                                                  \
          The god placed great force within him. Making his voice\
          like Lycaon\'92s, a son of Priam, Apollo,\
          Zeus\'92 son, taking on that man\'92s shape, spoke out:\
          \
          \'93Aeneas, Trojan counsellor, where are now\
          those threats you used to make to Trojan princes,\
[100] as you drank your wine and promised them                                   \
          you\'92d fight Peleus\'92 son, Achilles, man to man?\'94\
          \
          Aeneas then said to Apollo in reply:\
          \
          \'93Son of Priam, why are you telling me\
          to fight the arrogant son of Peleus,\
          when I don\'92t wish to? This isn\'92t the first time\
          swift Achilles and I have come to blows.\
          Once before he chased me away from Ida                                                   \
          with his spear\'97he\'92d come for our cattle,\
          when he destroyed Lyrnessus and Pedasus.\
[110] But then Zeus saved me\'97he gave me strength                              \
          and made my legs run faster. Otherwise,\
          Athena and Achilles would have killed me.\
          She went on ahead of him to make things safe.\
          Then she told him to kill off the Leleges\
          with his bronze spear, as well as Trojans.\
          No man can face Achilles in a fight\'97\
          some god is constantly beside him, saving him\
          and making sure his spear flies always straight,\
          not stopping till it\'92s hit some human flesh.                                                \
[120] If some god made sure our fight was equal,                                    \
          he\'92d not easily defeat me, even though\
          he boasted he\'92s completely made of bronze.\'94\
          \
          Apollo, son of Zeus, then said to Aeneas:\
          \
          \'93But, as a warrior, you, too, should pray\
          to the immortal gods. For people say\
          that Aphrodite, Zeus\'92 daughter, bore you,\
          while he comes from a lesser goddess.\
          Your mother is great Zeus\'92 daughter, but his\
          a daughter of the Old Man of the Sea.\
[130] So go straight at him with your tireless bronze.                            \
          Don\'92t let him hold you back with words,\
          expressing his contempt or making threats.\'94\
          \
          With these words, Apollo breathed great power then                                       \
          into that shepherd of his people. Through the front lines\
          Aeneas strode, armed in gleaming bronze. As he moved,\
          going after Peleus\'92 son among those crowds of men,\
          he did not go unnoticed. Seeing Anchises\'92 son,\
          Hera gathered her companion gods and said:\
          \
          \'93Poseidon, Athena, both your hearts\
[140] should think about what\'92s going on. Aeneas,                                 \
          armed in gleaming bronze, is going to meet\
          the son of Peleus, at Apollo\'92s urging.\
          So let\'92s work to turn him back at once,\
          or else one of us should help Achilles,                                                        \
          give him great strength, so that his heart won\'92t flinch.\
          And then he\'92ll know the gods who love him\
          are the best of the immortals and those gods\
          who up to now have guarded Trojans\
          in this war\'92s battles have only little power,\
[150] as feeble as the wind. We\'92ve all come here,                                    \
          down from Olympus, to join this conflict,\
          so Achilles will not come to any harm\
          from Trojans, at least not in the fight today.\
          Later, he\'92ll suffer everything which Fate\
          spun with her thread for him that very day\
          his mother bore him. But if Achilles\
          doesn\'92t learn this from a god who speaks to him,                                     \
          then he may be fearful if some god appears\
          against him in the battle. For the gods\
[160] are terrifying when they reveal themselves.\'94                                  \
          \
          Earthshaker Poseidon then answered her:\
          \
                                                                           \'93Hera,\
          don\'92t let your rage defeat your common sense.\
          There\'92s no need. For I have no desire\
          that gods should fight each other in this battle.\
          We should move off to one side and sit down\
          where we can watch, leaving this war to men.\
          But if Phoebus Apollo or if Ares\
          begins to fight or holds Achilles back,\
          not allowing him to go on fighting,\
[170] then we\'92ll get in the conflict right away,                                                    \
          join in the battle. Soon enough, I think,\
          those two will remove themselves from warfare,\
          returning to Olympus, to the company\
          of other gods whom our strong hands have conquered.\'94\
          \
          With these words, the dark-haired god Poseidon led the way\
          to the remnants of the wall of godlike Hercules,\
          the high rampart Pallas Athena and the Trojans\
          had built for him, so he could protect himself\
          and escape that monster from the sea, when it forced him\
[180] to move in from the shore. Poseidon sat there,                                       \
          beside the other gods, wrapping a concealing cloud\
          around their shoulders. The other group of gods                                                \
          sat on the crest of Callicolone, around you,\
          archer Phoebus, and Ares, who destroys whole cities.\
          So these gods sat there on either side, making plans,\
          both groups holding back from fighting painful war.\
          Sitting high above them, Zeus stayed in control.\
          \
          The whole plain by now was filled with men and horses,\
          all in gleaming bronze. The ground shook underfoot,\
[190] as men charged each other. Two of the finest men                                 \
          then came at one another in the middle ground\
          between the armies, both prepared for combat\'97\
          Aeneas, Anchises\'92 son, and godlike Achilles.                                                       \
          Aeneas strode out first, making threatening taunts,\
          his heavy helmet nodding as he moved around.\
          Holding his strong shield across his chest, he brandished\
          his bronze spear. The son of Peleus, from the other side,\
          charged up against him like a murderous lion\
          which a whole community is keen to slaughter\'97\
[200] At first, the beast moves on and leaves the group alone,                      \
          but when some quick young hunter hits it with a spear,\
          the lion gathers itself, opens its jaws wide,\
          foaming at the mouth, as its brave heart roars inside.\
          Its tail twitches to and fro against its ribs and flanks.                                       \
          Then it drives itself to fight, charging straight ahead\
          with furiously glaring eyes to kill someone\
          or die there in the first attack. That\'92s how Achilles,\
          driven by his furious proud heart, came on then\
          against the brave Aeneas. As they approached each other,\
[210] coming to close quarters, swift-footed Achilles yelled:                         \
          \
          \'93Aeneas, why have you stepped forward,\
          standing here so far in front of all your men?\
          Does your heart prompt you to fight against me\
          in the hope you\'92ll win Priam\'92s royal honours\
          among horse-taming Trojans? If you kill me,                                             \
          that won\'92t make Priam put his regal power\
          in your hands. For he has his own sons.\
          Besides, he\'92s healthy, and he is no fool.\
          Or have the Trojans given you some land\
[220] better than all the rest\'97a fine orchard,                                          \
          as well as land to plough\'97yours to keep,\
          if you kill me? You\'92ll find that hard to do.\
          My spear has sent you running once before.\
          Don\'92t you remember? You were alone.\
          I chased you away from your own cattle.\
          You scampered off, down Mount Ida\'92s slopes,\
          and quickly, too. That time we met, you ran                                              \
          and never once looked back, then hid yourself\
          inside Lyrnessus. But I destroyed that city\'97\
[230] I attacked it with help from Athena,                                                \
          as well as Father Zeus, seized their women\
          and took away their freedom. You were saved,\
          thanks to Zeus and other gods. But today,\
          I don\'92t think he\'92ll save you, as your heart hopes.\
          So I\'92m telling you to move back now,\
          retreat into the crowd. Don\'92t stand against me,\
          or you\'92ll come up against an evil time.\
          A man who doesn\'92t face the facts is stupid.\'94\
          \
          Aeneas then said in response:\
          \
          \'93Son of Peleus,\
[240] don\'92t try to scare me off with words, as if                                                 \
          I were a child. I, too, know well enough\
          how to hand out threats and insults. We both know\
          each other\'92s parents and our ancestry.\
          We\'92ve heard the famous tales of mortal men,\
          told long ago, though your eyes have not seen\
          my parents, nor mine yours. People say\
          you\'92re noble Peleus\'92 son, your mother\
          fair-haired Thetis, daughter of the sea.\
          Well, I claim I\'92m great Anchises\'92 son,\
[250] and Aphrodite is my mother. Today,                                               \
          one of them will mourn a dear dead son.                                                    \
          For I don\'92t think that you and I will leave\
          without a fight, once we\'92ve exchanged\
          some childish conversation. But if you wish,\
          then listen to me, so you\'92ll understand\
          my lineage well. Many people know it.\
          First cloud-gatherer Zeus fathered Dardanus,\
          who built Dardania, for sacred Ilion,\
          city of mortal men, was not yet built\
[260] here in the plain. His people settled there,                                    \
          by the slopes of Ida with its many springs.\
          Dardanus, in turn, was father to a son,\
          king Erichthonius, and he became\
          the richest of all mortals, possessing                                                           \
          three thousand horses grazing in the fens,\
          all mares happy with their foals. Then North Wind\
          fell in love with them as they pastured there.\
          Taking on the form of a dark stallion,\
          he copulated with them. They conceived,\
[270] delivering twelve foals. When these foals played,                         \
          running across the fertile farmland, they\'92d skim\
          the highest ears of corn and never break them,\
          or they\'92d race across the sea\'92s broad back,\
          gliding the surface of the breaking waves.\
          This Erichthonius had a son Tros,\
          who ruled the Trojans, and Tros then fathered                                          \
          three outstanding sons\'97Ilus, Assaracus,\
          and godlike Ganymede, the handsomest man\
          among all mortal men, so beautiful,\
[280] gods kidnapped him and made him cup bearer                             \
          to Zeus himself, so he\'92d live among immortals.\
          Ilus had a noble son, Laomedon,\
          who fathered Priam and Tithonus,\
          Clytius and warlike Hicataon.\
          Assaracus fathered his son Capys,\
          who had Anchises. He is my father.\
          Priam\'92s son is godlike Hector. That, then,                                                  \
          is my ancestry, the blood I boast of.\
          But as for courage, well, that\'92s up to Zeus,\
[290] who makes it less or greater as he wills,                                         \
          for he\'92s the mightiest one of all. But come,\
          let\'92s no longer talk this way, like little boys\
          standing in the middle of a battle.\
          Both of us have insults we could utter,\
          lots of them, so many that a cargo ship\
          with a hundred oars could not take on the load.\
          Men\'92s tongues are glib, with various languages\'97\
          words can go here and there in all directions,\
          and the sorts of words one speaks will be                                                  \
[300] the sorts of words one has to listen to.                                           \
          But what\'92s the point? Why should the two of us\
          be squabbling here and fight by trading insults\
          back and forth, like two irritated women,\
          who, in some heart-wrenching raging spat,\
          go into the street to scream at one another\
          with facts and lies, each one gripped by anger.\
          I want to fight\'97your words won\'92t send me off,\
          not before we\'92ve fought it out with bronze,\
          man to man. So come. Let\'92s start this now\
[310] and test each other with our bronze-tipped spears.\'94                    \
          \
          Aeneas finished. Then he threw his heavy spear\
          at Achilles\'92 wondrous, dreadful shield. As it hit,                                                 \
          the spear point made the shield ring out. Peleus\'92 son\
          held the shield away from him in his big fist,\
          fearing the long-shadowed spear from brave Aeneas\
          would easily go through. That was a foolish thought!\
          His heart and mind were not aware that gifts like that,\
          splendid presents from the gods to mortal men,\
          are not so easily defeated, nor do they fail.\
[320] So the mighty spear of warrior Aeneas                                                     \
          did not break the shield, stopped by the golden armour,\
          a present from the god. It drove on through two layers,\
          but there were still three more, for crippled god Hephaestus\
          had hammered out five layers, two made of bronze,                                          \
          two inner ones of tin, with a gold one in between.\
          The gold one stopped that ash spear from Aeneas.\
          Then Achilles, in his turn, hurled his long-shadowed spear,\
          hitting Aeneas\'92 round shield right on the rim,\
          where bronze and leather backing were the thinnest.\
[330] The spear of Pelian ash drove straight through the shield,                   \
          which rattled from the blow. Aeneas cowered down,\
          holding the shield out away from him in terror.\
          The spear flew high, above his back, then drove itself\
          into the ground. But it ripped apart two layers                                                   \
          on that protective shield. Having escaped the spear,\
          Aeneas straightened up, eyes glazed with shock,\
          frightened that the spear had come so close to him.\
          Drawing his sword, Achilles launched a frenzied charge\
          with a blood-curdling scream. Aeneas picked up a rock,\
[340] a heavy lift, which no two men now alive could do,                               \
          although he managed it with ease all by himself.\
          With that rock Aeneas would have struck Achilles,\
          as he charged at him, on his helmet or the shield\
          which had rescued him from death, and then Achilles\
          in close combat with his sword would have taken                                             \
          Aeneas\'92 life, had not the Earthshaker Poseidon\
          been paying attention. He spoke up immediately,\
          addressing the immortal gods beside him.\
          \
          \'93Here\'92s trouble. I feel sorry for Aeneas,\
[350] who\'92ll be going down to Hades quickly,                                          \
          slain by Peleus\'92 son, because Apollo,\
          the far shooter, talked him into it, the fool!\
          Apollo won\'92t protect him from grim death.\
          But why should an innocent man like him\
          suffer such misfortune, without doing wrong,\
          just because of other people\'92s troubles?\
          With all his gifts, he\'92s bringing pleasure\
          to the gods who live in spacious heaven.\
          So come, let\'92s carry him away from death,                                                  \
[360] in case the son of Cronos grows enraged,                                        \
          if he\'92s killed by Achilles. For Fate ordains\
          that he\'92ll escape, so the Dardanian race\
          will not die out and leave no seed alive.*\
          For the son of Cronos did love Dardanus\
          above all other children born to him\
          from mortal women, though he\'92s come to hate\
          the family of Priam. So now Trojans\
          will be ruled by powerful Aeneas,\
          his children\'92s children born in years to come.\'94\
          \
[370] Ox-eyed queen Hera then said to Poseidon:                                            \
          \
          \'93Earthshaker, in your own heart and mind                                                 \
          you must decide whether to save Aeneas,\
          or to leave him, for all his nobleness,\
          to be killed by Peleus\'92 son, Achilles.\
          We two, Pallas Athena and myself,\
          have often sworn among immortals\
          not to rescue Trojans from wretched death,\
          not even when all Troy is being engulfed\
          in all-consuming, blazing fire, set off\
          by Achaea\'92s warrior sons.\'94\
          \
[380] Hearing her words,                                     \
          Earthshaker Poseidon went down into the battle,\
          among the flying spears and came right to the place\
          where Aeneas stood with glorious Achilles.                                                        \
          At once he cast a dense mist on Achilles\'92 eyes,\
          pulled the ash spear of Peleus\'92 son out of the shield\
          of brave Aeneas and set it at Achilles\'92 feet.\
          Poseidon then raised Aeneas up, swinging him\
          far above the ground. Aeneas soared high up,\
          above the many ranks of warriors and chariots,\
[390] flying from Poseidon\'92s hand, and then came down                                 \
          on the fringes of that battle, where the Caucones\
          were arming for the fight. Then Earthshaker Poseidon,                                     \
          coming up beside Aeneas, spoke to him\'97\
          his words had wings:\
          \
          \'93Aeneas,\
          what god brought on such foolishness in you\'97\
          fighting man to man with proud Achilles,\
          a stronger man and more loved by the gods?\
          When you run into him, you must move back,\
          or you\'92ll end up in Hades\'92 house, contravening\
[400] what destiny ordains. But when Achilles                                        \
          has met his fate and died, then you may fight\
          in full confidence among those at the front,\
          for of all Achaeans no one else will kill you.\'94\
          \
          With these words, Poseidon left, once he\'92d explained                                       \
          these matters to Aeneas. Then he took away\
          the wondrous mist over Achilles\'92 eyes. He looked out,\
          testing his eyesight, and spoke to his great heart,\
          passionately confused:\
          \
                                               \'93What\'92s happening?\
          My eyes are playing amazing tricks on me.\
[410] I see my spear lying here upon the ground,                                    \
          but I don\'92t see the man I threw it at\
          in my eagerness to kill him. Aeneas\
          must be really dear to the immortal gods,\
          though I thought those things he boasted of\
          were merely idle talk. Well, let him go.\
          He\'92ll have no heart to try me once again.\
          He\'92ll be delighted to escape being killed.                                                   \
          Come, I\'92ll give a shout to these Danaans\
          to fight more Trojans\'97put them to the test.\'94\
          \
[420] Achilles finished. Then he leapt in among the ranks,                             \
          calling each man:\
          \
          \'93Don\'92t just stand there any more,\
          you fine Achaeans\'97don\'92t stay away from Trojans.\
          Let each of you go up against your man\
          in full warrior fury. It\'92s hard for me,\
          though I\'92m a powerful man, to attack\
          so many men and battle with them all.\
          Even deathless gods like Ares and Athena\
          could not fight them in the jaws of war\
          in such a conflict and keep on going.\
[430] But what I can do with my hands and feet                                                \
          and my own power, I\'92ll do. I\'92ll not hold back,\
          but go straight at their lines. I don\'92t think\
          a Trojan who gets within my spear range\
          will have reason to feel happy.\'94\
          \
          With these words,\
          Achilles urged them on. Then splendid Hector,\
          calling with a shout, announced that he\'92d come forward\
          to confront Achilles.\
          \
          \'93You proud-hearted Trojans,\
          don\'92t be afraid of that son of Peleus.\
          I, too, can battle anyone with words,\
[440] even the immortals. But with a spear,                                             \
          that\'92s more difficult\'97they\'92re so much stronger.\
          Achilles won\'92t accomplish everything\
          he says he will. Some of it he\'92ll manage,                                                     \
          some he\'92ll leave undone. I\'92ll go against him,\
          though his blazing hands are like a fire,\
          his strength like glittering iron.\'94\
          \
          With these words\
          he roused them into action. Trojans held their spears up high,\
          then turned to face Achaeans. Both sides joined battle\
          in a terrific frenzy. Then Phoebus Apollo,\
          moving close to Hector, spoke to him:\
          \
[450] \'93Hector,       &n bsp;                                         \
          don\'92t step out to face Achilles openly.\
          Wait for him in the noisy crowd of men.\
          Don\'92t let him hit you with his spear or slash you\
          at close quarters with his sword.\'94\
          \
          Apollo spoke.\
          Hector pulled back into the crowd of soldiers,\
          seized with fear at hearing a god\'92s voice talk to him.                                         \
          Giving a blood-curdling scream, Achilles leapt\
          among the Trojans, his heart wrapped in battle fury.\
          First he killed Iphition, Otrynteus\'92 brave son,\
[460] who commanded many men. A Naiad nymph bore him                        \
          to Otrynteus, sacker of cities, in Hyde,\
          a fertile land, below snow-covered Mount Tmolus.\
          As he charged right at him, godlike Achilles\
          struck Iphition with his spear squarely in the head,\
          splitting his skull apart. He fell with a crash.\
          Godlike Achilles then cried out in triumph:\
          \
          \'93Lie there, son of Otrynteus, of all men\
          the one we fear the most. Here you die.                                                      \
          You were born beside the Gygaean lake,\
[470] on your father\'92s land, by the fish-filled Hyllus                               \
          and the swirling Hermus rivers.\'94\
          \
          Achilles triumphed. But down on Iphition\'92s eyes\
          the darkness fell, and then, in the first attack,\
          Achaean wheel rims on the chariots ripped him up.\
          After him, Achilles went for Demoleon,\
          Antenor\'92s son, a brave defensive fighter,\
          hitting the bronze cheek armour on his helmet.\
          But that didn\'92t check the spear\'97it smashed through,\
          breaking his skull, splattering all his brains inside.\
[480] That stopped his fighting charge. Then Hippodamas                                       \
          jumped down out of his chariot to flee Achilles.\
          But Achilles speared him in the back. As he died,\
          panting his life away, he screamed\'97just as a bull roars,\
          when it\'92s pulled around the altar of Poseidon,\
          lord of Helice, the Earthshaker, who delights\
          in those young lads who drag the beast\'97in just that way\
          Hippodamas bellowed then, as his noble spirit\
          slipped out from his bones. Then Achilles with his spear\
          attacked noble Polydorus, son of Priam.\
[490] His father would not let Polydorus fight,                                                 \
          for of all his children he was the youngest born,\
          the one most loved. He was the fastest runner, too.                                          \
          Now, like a fool, he was showing off his speed,\
          sprinting through front lines until he lost his life.\
          As he ran past, swift-footed godlike Achilles\
          threw his spear into the middle of his back,\
          where the golden belt clasps joined together\
          on the overlapping body armour. The spear point,\
          going straight through, came out his navel. With a scream,\
[500] he fell onto his knees. Then black cloud enveloped him.                      \
          As he collapsed, his guts spilled out into his hands.\
          \
          When Hector saw his brother Polydorus there,\
          down on the ground, collapsed and holding his own entrails,                          \
          a mist flowed right across his eyes. He could no longer\
          bear to keep his distance. He moved against Achilles,\
          waving his sharp spear, just like a flame. Achilles,\
          when he saw him, jumped out and roared in triumph:\
          \
          \'93He\'92s getting closer\'97the very man\
          who scarred my heart more than all other men.\
[510] We won\'92t be evading one another                                                    \
          in the battle lanes much longer.\'94\
          \
          As he said this, Achilles scowled at godlike Hector,\
          then yelled at him:\
          \
          \'93Come closer,\
          so you can meet your fatal doom more quickly.\'94\
          \
          Hector of the shining helmet, quite unafraid,                                                     \
          then cried out to Achilles:\
          \
          \'93Son of Peleus,\
          don\'92t try to frighten me with words, as if\
          I were some child. I, too, know well enough\
          how to shout out taunting words and insults.\
[520] I know you\'92re brave, stronger than me by far.                                \
          But these things are in the lap of the gods.\
          Though I\'92m the weaker man, I\'92ll take your life,\
          with one throw of my spear, for in the past\
          it\'92s proved it\'92s sharp enough.\'94\
          \
          With these words,\
          Hector raised his spear and threw it. But Athena,\
          with the slightest puff of breath, blew it aside,\
          away from glorious Achilles, turning it back\
          to godlike Hector. It landed there beside his feet.                                              \
          Then, with a terrifying shout, Achilles charged,\
[530] lusting to kill. But Apollo snatched up Hector,                                       \
          something a god can do with ease, then hid him\
          in thick cloud. Swift-footed, godlike Achilles\
          charged that cloud three times, striking hard each time\
          with his bronze spear. When for the fourth time\
          he came on like a god with a terrific shout,\
          Achilles cried out these winged words to Hector:\
          \
          \'93You dog\'97once more you\'92re evading death for now.\
          But you\'92ve narrowly escaped disaster.\
          Phoebus Apollo has saved you one more time.                                          \
[540] No doubt you always pray to him as you go                                   \
          out into the sound of thudding spears.\
          Next time we meet, I\'92ll surely finish you,\
          if some god is there to assist me, too.\
          For now I\'92ll fight the others, any man\
          I chance to meet.\'94\
          \
          Achilles finished shouting.\
          Then he struck Dryops with his spear right in the neck.\
          Dryops fell at Achilles\'92 feet. But he left him there.\
          Next, Achilles stopped Demouchus, Philetor\'92s son,\
          a big brave warrior, with a spear thrust in his knee.\
[550] Then he hit him with his massive sword, taking his life.                       \
          After that, he went at Dardanus and Laogonus,\
          both sons of Bias, throwing them out of their chariot                                       \
          onto the ground. He hit one of them with his spear\
          and slashed the other at close quarters with his sword.\
          \
          Then Tros, Alastor\'92s son, fell at Achilles knees,\
          clutching them, begging him to spare his life,\
          to capture him alive, instead of killing him,\
          moved by pity for a man the same age as himself.\
          What a fool! He did not know there was no way\
[560] to change Achilles\'92 mind\'97he was not a tender man                              \
          with a soft heart, but full of fighting rage. With his hands\
          Tros tried to clutch Achilles\'92 knees, desperate\
          to plead for mercy, but Achilles\'92 sword struck him\
          in his liver, which slid out from the wound.\
          Black blood, pouring from the gash, filled up his lap.                                        \
          Then darkness veiled his eyes, and his spirit left him.\
          \
          Next, Achilles moved up to Mulius and with his spear\
          struck him on the ear. The bronze point, driven in hard,\
          came out his other ear. Then he hit Echeclus,\
[570] Agenor\'92s son, with his hilted sword right on his head.                           \
          The blood made the whole blade hot. Then dark death,\
          his powerful fate, came down across his eyes.\
          Next, Achilles hit Deucalion\'97his bronze spear point\
          struck him in the arm where tendons meet the elbow.\
          His arm now useless, Deucalion stood there waiting,                                       \
          staring death right in the face. Achilles hit him\
          with his sword blade in the neck, slicing off his head.\
          He knocked the head and the helmet far away.\
          From Deucalion\'92s spine the marrow spurted out,\
[580] as his body lay there, stretched out on the ground.                                \
          Next, Achilles, after chasing the noble son of Peires,\
          Rhigmus, who\'92d come from fertile Thrace, hit him\
          with a spear throw in the gut, fixing the bronze\
          firmly in his belly. Rhigmus fell from his chariot.\
          His attendant, Areithous, wheeled the horses round,\
          but Achilles\'92 sharp spear struck him in the back\
          and threw him from the chariot. The horses bolted.\
          \
          Just as a terrifying fire rages through deep woods                                              \
          on a parched mountain, burning dense stands of trees,\
[590] as the driving wind blows flames to every spot,                                     \
          that how Achilles, like a god, raged with his spear,\
          attacking and killing men all through the fight.\
          The dark earth ran with blood. Just as a man yokes oxen,\
          big bulls, wide in the shoulder, to grind barley\
          on a well-built threshing floor, and lowing oxen\
          quickly flatten all the grain, that how brave Achilles\
          drove his sure-footed horses to trample on the dead\
          and on their shields as well. The chariot axle underneath\
          got sprayed with blood. Blood soaked the chariot rails,                                    \
[600] thrown up in gouts from horses\'92 hooves and wheel rims.                      \
          But Peleus\'92 son pushed on to win more glory,\
          blood spattered over his all-conquering hands.}