{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf460
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural\qc

\f0\fs24 \cf0 Book Twenty Two\
The Death of Hector\
          \

\i [The Trojans retreat into the city;  Apollo reveals his deception to Achilles; Hector remains outside the gates; Priam and Hecuba appeal to Hector to come inside the walls; Hector debates what to do, then panics and runs away; Achilles chases Hector around Troy; the gods look on; Zeus holds up his golden scales; Athena intervenes to advise Achilles; Athena takes on the form of De\'efphobus to get Hector to fight Achilles; Hector and Achilles fight; Hector is killed; the Achaeans mutilate Hector and Achilles dishonors the corpse; Priam and Hecuba see the corpse of Hector being dragged past the city; Andromache reacts to the sight of her dead husband]\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\i0 \cf0           \
          At this point, the Trojans, having fled like deer,\
          spread out through the city, resting by its sturdy walls,\
          drying their sweat and taking drink to slake their thirst.\
          Meanwhile, Achaeans were moving to the walls,\
          their shields held up against their shoulders. But Hector\
          was forced by deadly Fate to stay right where he stood\
          in front of Ilion, outside the Scaean Gate.\
          \
          Then Phoebus Apollo spoke out to Achilles:\
          \
          \'93Son of Peleus, why are you, a mere human,\
  [10] running so hard in an attempt to catch me,                                    \
          an immortal god? You\'92re still ignorant,\
          it seems, of the fact that I\'92m a god.\
          You keep coming at me with such anger.                                                    \
          But what about your battle with those Trojans\
          you put to flight? They\'92re crowding in the city,\
          while you chase off on a diversion here.\
          But you will never kill me. I\'92m not someone\
          whose fate it is to die.\'94\
          \
          Swift-footed Achilles,\
          in a towering fury, then answered Apollo:\
          \
          \'93You\'92ve tricked me,\
  [20] god who shoots from far away, deadliest                                        \
          of all the gods. You\'92ve turned me from the wall.\
          Otherwise, before reaching Ilion,\
          many men would have sunk their teeth in earth.\
          You\'92ve robbed me of great glory, saving them\
          with ease, since you don\'92t have to be afraid\
          of future retribution. I\'92d make you pay,\
          if only I were powerful enough.\'94                                                                   \
          \
          With these words, Achilles set off towards the city,\
          his heart full, charging on like a prize-winning horse\
  [30] pulling a chariot at full speed across the plain                                        \
          with little effort\'97that\'92s how fast Achilles ran,\
          sprinting with his legs and feet.\
          \
          Meanwhile, old Priam\
          was the first to catch sight of Achilles, as he dashed\
          across the plain, blazing like that star which comes\
          at harvest time\'97its light shines out more brightly\
          than any of the countless lights in night\'92s dark sky.\
          People call this star by the name Orion\'92s Dog.\
          It\'92s the brightest of the stars, but an unwelcome sign,                                       \
          for it brings wretched mortals many fevers.\
  [40] The bronze on Achilles\'92 chest glittered like that star,                            \
          as he ran forward. With a cry, old Priam\
          struck his head with his hand, then, reaching up,\
          with many groans, he called out, pleading with his son,\
          who was still standing there before the gates,\
          firmly resolved to fight Achilles. The old man,\
          hands outstretched, appealed to Hector\'92s sense of pity:\
          \
          \'93Hector, my dear son, don\'92t stand out there alone,\
          facing that man with no one else to help you,\
          or you will quickly meet your death, slaughtered\
  [50] by Peleus\'92 son, who\'92s much more powerful.                                                \
          Don\'92t be obstinate. If only the gods\
          would love Achilles just as much as I do,\
          then dogs and vultures would soon gnaw at him\
          as he lay there. And then my heart might shed\
          its dreadful sorrow, for he\'92s taken from me\
          many valiant sons. Some he\'92s butchered.\
          Others he\'92s sold in islands far away.\
          Right now, I can\'92t see two of my young sons,\
          Polydorus and Lycaon, among those\
  [60] who\'92ve gathered with the Trojans in the city,                                 \
          both delivered to me from Laothoe,\
          queen among women. If they\'92re still alive\
          in the Achaean camp, we\'92ll ransom them,\
          with bronze and gold we have stored up at home.                                    \
          For famous ancient Altes gave many gifts\
          when he gave me his daughter. But if they\'92re dead\
          and already in that dwelling place of Hades,\
          that\'92s a sorrow to my heart, their mother\'92s, too,\
          their parents. But that\'92s a briefer sorrow\
  [70] for other people, unless you die as well,                                         \
          slaughtered by Achilles. Come here, my child,\
          inside the walls, so you can help to save\
          Trojan men and women. Don\'92t give that man,\
          that son of Peleus, great glory. He\'92ll take\
          your own dear life. Have pity on me, too.\
          Though full of misery, I still can feel.\
          Father Zeus will kill me with a cruel fate                                                    \
          on the threshold of old age, once I\'92ve seen\
          so many dreadful things\'97my sons butchered,\
  [80] my daughters hauled away, their houses ransacked,                     \
          their little children tossed down on the ground\
          in this murderous war, my daughters-in-law\
          led off captive in hard Achaean hands.\
          In the end, I\'92ll be ripped by ravenous dogs,\
          in front of my own doors when some man strikes me\
          with his sharp bronze or throws his spear in me,\
          robbing my limbs of life\'97the same dogs I raised\
          at home beside my table to guard the doors.\
          They\'92ll drink my blood, then lie there at the gates,                                   \
  [90] their hearts gone mad. When a young man dies in war                \
          lying there cut down by sharp bronze, that\'92s all right.\
          Though dead, he shows us his nobility.\
          But when the dogs disfigure shamefully\
          an old man, chewing his grey head, his beard,\
          his sexual organs, that\'92s the saddest thing\
          we wretched mortals see.\'94\
          \
          As the old man spoke,\
          his hands tugged his grey hair and pulled it from his head.\
          But he could not sway Hector\'92s heart. Beside Priam,\
          Hector\'92s mother wept. Then she undid her robe,\
[100] and with her hands pushed out her breasts, shedding tears.                            \
          She cried out, calling him\'97her words had wings:\
          \
          \'93Hector, my child, respect and pity me.\
          If I ever gave these breasts to soothe you,\
          remember that, dear child. Protect yourself\
          against your enemy inside these walls.\
          Don\'92t stand out there to face him. Stubborn man,\
          if he kills you, I\'92ll never lay you out\
          on your death bed or mourn for you, my child,\
          my dearest offspring\'97nor will your fair wife.\
[110] Far away from us, beside Achaean ships,                                        \
          their swift dogs will eat you.\'94\
          \
          So these two, both crying, spoke to their dear son,                                            \
          pleading with him incessantly. But Hector\'92s heart\
          would not budge. He stood awaiting huge Achilles,\
          who was getting closer. Just as a mountain snake\
          waits for some man right by its lair, after eating\
          poison herbs so that a savage anger grips him,\
          as he coils beside his den with a fearful glare\'97\
          that\'92s how Hector\'92s dauntless heart would not retreat.\
[120] But then he leaned his bright shield up against the wall                       \
          where it jutted out, and, with a groan, spoke up,\
          addressing his courageous heart:\
          \
          \'93What do I do?\
          If I go through the gates, inside that wall,\
          Polydamas will be the first to blame me,                                                    \
          for he told me last night to lead the Trojans\
          back into the city, when many died,\
          once godlike Achilles rejoined the fight.\
          But I didn\'92t listen. If I\'92d done so,\
          things would have been much better. As it is,\
[130] my own foolishness has wiped out our army.                                \
          Trojan men will make me feel ashamed\'97\
          so will Trojan women in their trailing gowns.\
          I\'92m afraid someone inferior to me\
          may say,\
          \
          \'91Hector, trusting his own power,\
          destroyed his people.\'92\
          \
          That\'92s what they\'92ll say.\
          For me it would be a great deal better\
          to meet Achilles man to man, kill him,\
          and go home, or get killed before the city,                                                 \
          dying in glory. But what would happen,\
[140] if I set my bossed shield and heavy helmet                                    \
          to one side, leaning my spear against the wall,\
          and went out to meet noble Achilles,\
          just as I am, promising that Helen,\
          along with all the goods shipped here to Troy\
          by Alexander in his hollow ships,\
          the origin of our hostilities,\
          would be given to the sons of Atreus,\
          to take away with them\'97in addition,\
          to give the Achaeans an equal share\
[150] of all this city holds. Then later on,                                                 \
          I\'92d get Trojan elders to swear on oath\
          that not a single thing would be concealed,\
          that all would be divided equally,\
          every treasure our lovely city owns.                                                             \
          But why\'92s my dear heart having this debate?\
          If I went out to meet him in that way,\
          he\'92d show me no respect. He wouldn\'92t pity me.\
          Once I\'92d set aside my armour, he\'92d kill me\
          on the spot, unarmed, like some woman.\
[160] There\'92s no way I can bargain with him now,                                   \
          like a boy and girl chatting by some rock\
          or oak tree, as they flirt with one another.\
          No, it\'92s better to clash in battle right away.\
          We\'92ll see which one wins victory from Zeus.\'94                                            \
          \
          That\'92s what Hector thought as he stood there waiting.\
          But Achilles was coming closer, like Enyalius,\
          the warrior god of battle with the shining helmet.\
          On his right shoulder he waved his dreadful spear\
          made of Pelian ash. The bronze around him glittered\
[170] like a blazing fire or rising sun. At that moment,                                   \
          as he watched, Hector began to shake in fear.\
          His courage gone, he could no longer stand there.\
          Terrified, he started running, leaving the gate.\
          Peleus\'92 son went after him, sure of his speed on foot.\
          Just as a mountain falcon, the fastest creature\
          of all the ones which fly, swoops down easily\
          on a trembling pigeon as it darts off in fear,                                                        \
          the hawk speeding after it with piercing cries,\
          heart driving it to seize the prey\'97in just that way\
[180] Achilles in his fury raced ahead. Hector ran                                            \
          under the walls of Troy, limbs working feverishly.\
          They ran on past the lookout and the wind-swept fig tree,\
          some distance from the wall, along the wagon track.\
          They reached the two fair-flowing well springs\
          which feed swirling Scamander\'92s stream. From one of them\
          hot water flows, and out of it steam rises up,\
          as if there were a fire burning. From the other,                                                   \
          cold water comes, as cold as hail or freezing snow\
          or melting ice, even in summer. By these springs\
[190] stood wide tubs for washing, made of beautiful stone,                          \
          where, in peace time, before Achaea\'92s sons arrived,\
          Trojan wives and lovely daughters used to wash\
          their brightly coloured clothing. The men raced past there,\
          one in full flight, the other one pursuing him.\
          The man running off in front was a brave warrior,\
          but the man going after him was greater. They ran fast,\
          for this was no contest over sacrificial beasts,\
          the usual prizes for a race. They were competing                                               \
          for horse-taming Hector\'92s life. Just as some horses,\
[200] sure-footed, prize-winning creatures, make the turn                             \
          around the post and race quickly as they strive to win\
          some splendid prize\'97a tripod or a woman\
          honouring a man that\'92s died\'97that\'92s how these two men raced,\
          going three times round Priam\'92s city on their sprinting feet.\
          All the gods looked on. Among them the first one to speak\
          was Zeus, father of the gods and men:\
          \
          \'93What a sight!\
          My eyes can see a fine man being pursued\
          around the walls. How my heart pities Hector,                                         \
          who\'92s often sacrificed to me, burning\
[210] many thighs of oxen on the crests                                                    \
          of Ida with its many spurs and valleys,\
          on the city heights, as well. And now,\
          godlike Achilles is pursuing him\
          on his quick feet round Priam\'92s city. Come,\
          you gods, think hard and offer your advice\'97\
          do we wish to rescue him from death,\
          or kill him now, for all his bravery,\
          at the hands of Peleus\'92 son, Achilles?\'94\
          \
          Then Athena,\
          goddess with the glittering eyes, replied to Zeus:\
          \
[220] \'93Father, lord of lightning and dark clouds,                                     \
          what are you saying? How can you want\
          to snatch the man back from his wretched death.                                     \
          He\'92s mortal\'97his fate doomed him long ago.\
          Well, do as you wish, but we other gods\
          will not all approve your actions.\'94\
          \
          Cloud-gatherer Zeus then answered Athena:\
          \
          \'93Cheer up, Tritogeneia, my dear child,\
          I\'92m not saying how my heart intends to act.\
          I want to please you. So you can do\
[230] whatever your mind tells you. Don\'92t hold back.\'94                                    \
          \
          Athena, who was already eager, was spurred on\
          by Zeus\'92 words. She rushed down from Olympus\'92 peak.\
          \
          Swift Achilles was still pressing Hector hard\
          in that relentless chase. Just as in the mountains\
          a hound startles from its cover some young deer,                                              \
          then goes after it through glens and valley gorges\'97\
          and even if the fawn evades it for a while,\
          cowering in some thicket, the dog tracks it down,\
          always running till he finds it\'97that\'92s how Hector\
[240] could not shake off the swift-footed son of Peleus.                                \
          Every time he tried to dash for the Dardanian gates\
          to get underneath the walls, so men on top\
          could come to his assistance by hurling spears,\
          Achilles would intercept him and turn him back\
          towards the plain, always making sure he kept\
          running a line between Hector and the city.\
          Like a dream in which a man cannot catch someone\
          who\'92s running off and the other can\'92t escape,                                                      \
          just as the first man can\'92t catch up\'97that\'92s how\
[250] Achilles, for all his speed, could not reach Hector,                                 \
          while Hector was unable to evade Achilles.\
          But how could Hector have escaped death\'92s fatal blow,\
          if Apollo had not for one last time approached,\
          to give him strength and make his legs run faster?\
          Godlike Achilles, with a shake of his head,\
          prevented his own troops from shooting Hector\
          with their lethal weapons, in case some other man\
          hit Hector, robbed him of the glory, and left him\
          to come too late. But when they ran past those springs\
[260] the fourth time, Father Zeus raised his golden scales,                           \
          setting there two fatal lots for death\'92s long sorrow,                                           \
          one for Achilles, one for horse-taming Hector.\
          Seizing it in the middle, Zeus raised his balance.\
          Hector\'92s fatal day sank, moving down to Hades.\
          At once Phoebus Apollo abandoned him.\
          Then Athena, goddess with the glittering eyes,\
          came to Peleus\'92 son. Standing close to him, she spoke\'97\
          her words had wings:\
          \
          \'93Glorious Achilles,\
          beloved of Zeus, now I hope the two of us\
[270] will take great glory to Achaean ships,                                            \
          by killing Hector, for all his love of war.\
          Now he can\'92t escape us any longer,\
          even though Apollo, the far shooter,                                                           \
          suffers every torment, as he grovels\
          before Father Zeus, who bears the aegis.\
          Stay still now. Catch your breath. I\'92ll go to Hector\
          and convince him to turn and stand against you.\'94\
          \
          Once Athena had said this, Achilles obeyed,\
          rejoicing in his heart, as he stood there, leaning\
[280] on his bronze-tipped ash spear. Athena left him.                                   \
          She came to Hector in the form of De\'efphobus,\
          with his tireless voice and shape. Standing beside him,\
          she spoke\'97her words had wings:\
          \
          \'93My brother,\
          swift Achilles is really harassing you,\
          with his fast running around Priam\'92s city                                                    \
          in this pursuit. Come, we\'92ll both stand here,\
          stay put, and beat off his attack.\'94\
          \
          Then Hector of the shining helmet answered her:\
          \
          \'93De\'efphobus, in the past you\'92ve always been\
[290] the brother whom I loved the most by far                                      \
          of children born to Hecuba and Priam.\
          I think I now respect you even more,\
          since you have dared to come outside the wall,\
          to help me, when you saw me in distress,\
          while the others all remained inside.\'94\
          \
          Goddess Athena with her glittering eyes replied:\
          \
          \'93Dear brother, my father, my noble mother,\
          and my comrades begged me repeatedly                                                    \
          to stay there. They all so fear Achilles.\
[300] But here inside me my heart felt the pain                                       \
          of bitter anguish. Now, let\'92s go straight for him.\
          Let\'92s fight and not hold back our spears,\
          so we can see if Achilles kills us both,\
          then takes the bloodstained trophies to the ships,\
          or whether you\'92ll destroy him on your spear.\'94\
          \
          With these words, Athena seduced him forward.\
          When they\'92d approached each other, at close quarters,\
          great Hector of the shining helmet spoke out first:\
          \
          \'93I\'92ll no longer try to run away from you,                                                               \
[310] son of Peleus, as I did before, going                                                          \
          three times in flight around Priam\'92s great city.\
          I lacked the courage then to fight with you,\
          as you attacked. But my heart prompts me now\
          to stand against you face to face once more,\
          whether I kill you, or you kill me.\
          So come here. Let\'92s call on gods to witness,\
          for they\'92re the best ones to observe our pact,\
          to supervise what we two agree on.\
          If Zeus grants me the strength to take your life,\
[320] I\'92ll not abuse your corpse in any way.                                                       \
          I\'92ll strip your celebrated armour off,\
          Achilles, then give the body back again\
          to the Achaeans. And you\'92ll do the same.\'94\
          \
          Swift-footed Achilles, with a scowl, replied:                                                        \
          \
          \'93Hector, don\'92t talk to me of our agreements.\
          That\'92s idiotic, like a faithful promise\
          between men and lions. Wolves and lambs\
          don\'92t share a common heart\'97they always sense\
          a mutual hatred for each other.\
[330] In just that way, it\'92s not possible for us,                                          \
          for you and me, to be friends, or, indeed,\
          for there to be sworn oaths between us,\
          till one or other of us falls, glutting Ares,\
          warrior with the bull\'92s hide shield, on blood.\
          You\'92d best remember all your fighting skills.\
          Now you must declare yourself a spearman,\
          a fearless warrior. You\'92ve got no escape.                                                     \
          Soon Pallas Athena will destroy you\
          on my spear. Right now you\'92ll pay me back,\
[340] the full price of those sorrows I went through                               \
          when you slaughtered my companions.\'94\
          \
          With these words, he hefted his long-shadowed spear,\
          then hurled it. However, anticipating the throw,\
          splendid Hector saw it coming and evaded it\
          by crouching down, so the bronze spear flew over him,\
          then struck the ground. But Pallas Athena grabbed it\
          and returned it to Achilles, without Hector,\
          that shepherd of his people, seeing what she\'92d done.\
          Hector then called out to Peleus\'92 noble son:\
          \
[350] \'93You missed, godlike Achilles. So it seems                                     \
          you learned nothing from Zeus about my death,                                       \
          although you said you had. That was just talk.\
          You were telling lies to make me fear you,\
          so I might forget my strength and courage.\
          Well, with your spear you won\'92t be striking me\
          in my back as I run away in fear.\
          You\'92ll have to drive it through my charging chest,\
          as I come right at you, if a god permits.\
          Now, see if you can cope with my bronze point.\
[360] I hope you get this whole spear in your flesh.                                \
          This war would then be easier on Trojans\
          with you dead, for yyou\'92re their greatest danger.\
          \
          With these words, Hector balanced his long-shadowed spear,\
          then threw it. It struck the shield of Peleus\'92 son,                                                \
          right in the centre. That spear didn\'92t miss its mark.\
          But it bounced some distance off the shield. Hector,\
          angry that the spear had flown from his hand and missed,\
          stood dismayed, for he had no substitute ash spear.\
          So he shouted out, calling to De\'efphobus,\
[370] who carried a white shield, asking him with a yell                                 \
          to pass him his long spear. But De\'efphobus\
          was nowhere to be seen. Then Hector in his heart\
          saw everything so clearly\'97he said:\
          \
          \'93This is it, then.\
          The gods are summoning me to my death.\
          I thought warrior De\'efphobus was close by.\
          But he\'92s inside the walls, and Athena\
          has deceived me. Now evil death is here,                                                    \
          right beside me, not somewhere far away.\
          There\'92s no escape. For a long time now,\
[380] this must have been what Zeus desired,                                          \
          and Zeus\'92 son, the god who shoots from far,\
          and all those who willingly gave me help\
          in earlier days. So now I meet my fate.\
          Even so, let me not die ingloriously\
          without a fight, but in some great action\
          which those men yet to come will hear about.\'94\
          \
          Hector finished speaking. He pulled out his sharp sword,\
          that strong and massive weapon hanging on his thigh,\
          gathered himself, then swooped like some high-flying eagle\
[390] plummeting to the plains down through the murky clouds                  \
          to seize a tender lamb or cowering rabbit\'97                                                        \
          that\'92s how Hector charged, brandishing his sharp sword.\
          Achilles attacked, as well, heart full of savage anger,\
          covering his chest with that richly decorated shield,\
          his shining four-ridged helmet nodding on his head,\
          the golden plumes Hephaestus had set there\
          shimmering around the crest. Just like that star\
          which stands out the loveliest among all those\
          in the heavenly night sky\'97the star of evening\'97\
[400] that\'92s how the sharp point then glittered on the spear                          \
          Achilles hefted in his right hand, intent on                                                          \
          killing noble Hector. He inspected his fine skin,\
          to see where it was vulnerable to a blow.\
          But Hector\'92s entire body was protected\
          by that beautiful armour he had stripped off\
          powerful Patroclus, once he\'92d killed him,\
          except for that opening where the collar bones\
          separate the neck and shoulders, at the gullet,\
          where a man\'92s life is most effectively destroyed.\
[410] As Hector charged, noble Achilles struck him there,                             \
          driving the spear point through his tender neck.\
          But the heavy bronze on that ash spear did not cut\
          his windpipe, so he could still address Achilles\
          and reply to him. Hector fell down in the dust.                                                  \
          Lord Achilles then cried out in triumph:\
          \
          \'93Hector,\
          I suppose you thought you could safely strip\
          Patroclus, without giving me a thought,\
          since I was far away. That was foolish!\
          By our hollow ships he\'92d left me behind,\
[420] a much greater man, to take out my revenge.                                \
          I\'92ve drained strength from your limbs\'97now dogs and birds\
          will tear you into miserable pieces,\
          while Achaeans are burying Patroclus.\'94\
          \
          His strength fading, Hector of the shining helmet\
          answered Achilles:\
          \
          \'93By your life, I beg you,\
          by your knees, your parents\'97don\'92t let dogs eat me\
          by Achaean ships. No, you should accept                                                    \
          all the bronze and gold you might desire,\
          gifts my father and lady mother give you,\
[430] if you\'92ll send my body home again,                                                  \
          so Trojans and Trojans\'92 wives can bury me,\
          with all the necessary funeral rites.\'94\
          \
          Scowling at Hector, swift-footed Achilles then replied:\
          \
          \'93Don\'92t whine to me, you dog, about my knees\
          or parents. I wish I had the heart and strength\
          to carve you up and eat you raw myself\
          for what you\'92ve done to me. So there\'92s no one\
          who\'92ll keep the dogs from going at your head,\
          not even if they bring here and weigh out\
[440] a ransom ten or twenty times as much,                                           \
          with promises of more, or if Priam,                                                             \
          son of Dardanus, says he\'92ll pay your weight\
          in gold. Not even then will your mother\
          set you on a funeral bed and there lament\
          the son she bore. Instead, the dogs and birds\
          will eat you up completely.\'94\
          \
          Then, as he died,\
          Hector of the shining helmet said to Achilles:\
          \
          \'93I know you well. I recognize in you\
          what I expected\'97 you\'92d not be convinced.\
[450] For your heart and mind are truly iron.                                           \
          But think of this\'97I may bring down on you\
          the anger of the gods that very day\
          when Paris and Phoebus Apollo,\
          in spite of all your courage, slaughter you                                                  \
          beside the Scaean Gate.\'94\
          \
          As Hector spoke,\
          death\'92s final end slid over him. His life slipped out,\
          flying off to Hades, mourning his fate to have to leave\
          such youthful manliness. Over dead Hector,\
          godlike Achilles then cried out:\
          \
          \'93Die there!\
[460] As for my own death, I accept it                                                       \
          whenever Zeus and the immortal gods\
          see fit to bring it to me.\'94\
          \
          Saying this,\
          he pulled his bronze spear from the corpse, set it aside,\
          and stripped the blood-stained armour from the shoulders.\
          Then the rest of Achaea\'92s sons came running up.\
          They gazed at Hector\'92s stature, his handsome body.                                         \
          All the men who came up to the corpse stabbed it,\
          looking at each other, saying:\
          \
          \'93Look here,\
          it\'92s easier for us to deal with Hector now\
[470] than when his fire burned our ships.\'94                                                       \
          \
          With words like this, they came up close and wounded Hector.\
          When swift-footed godlike Achilles had stripped the corpse,\
          standing among Achaeans, he spoke these winged words:\
          \
          \'93My friends, leaders and rulers of the Argives,\
          since gods have granted that this man be killed,\
          who\'92s done much damage, more than all the rest,                                     \
          let\'92s test these Trojan by attacking them\
          with armed excursions round their city,\
          to see what they intend\'97whether they\'92ll leave\
[480] their lofty city now that Hector\'92s dead,                                           \
          or stay there, still keen to fight without him.\
          But why\'92s my fond heart discussing this?\
          By our ships lies a dead man\'97unwept,\
          unburied\'97Patroclus. I\'92ll not forget him,\
          as long as I remain among the living,\
          as long as my dear limbs have motion.\
          If down in Hades men forget their dead,\
          even there I will remember my companion.                                               \
          Come, young Achaeans, sing a victory song,\
[490] as we\'92re returning to our hollow ships.                                         \
          We\'92ll take the body. We\'92ve won great glory,\
          killing noble Hector\'97Trojans prayed to him\
          in their own city, as if he were a god.\'94\
          \
          Achilles finished. Then on noble Hector\'92s corpse\
          he carried out a monstrous act. He cut through\
          the tendons behind both feet, from heel to ankle,\
          threaded them with ox-hide thongs, and then tied these\
          onto his chariot, leaving the head to drag behind.\
          He climbed up in his chariot, brought on the splendid armour,\
[500] then lashed his horses. They sped off eagerly,                                                   \
          dragging Hector. A dust cloud rose above him,\
          his dark hair spread out round him, and Hector\'92s head,\
          once so handsome, was covered by the dust, for Zeus\
          had given him to his enemies to dishonour\
          in his own native land. So all his head grew dirty.\
          \
          When she saw her son, his mother pulled her hair,\
          threw off her shining veil, and began to shriek.\
          His dear father gave a pitiful groan. Around them,\
          people were overwhelmed with wailing and laments\
[510] throughout the city. It was as if all Ilion                                                              \
          were engulfed in flames, all over the summit\
          of that towering rock. The people then had trouble\
          restraining the old man in his frantic grief,\
          his desperate wish to go through the Dardanian gate.\
          He begged them all, grovelling in the dirt, calling out,\
          naming each of them:\
          \
          \'93My dear friends,\
          leave me alone. I know you care for me,\
          but let me leave the city by myself,\
          go to the Achaean ships, then beg him,\
[520] that ruthless man, that violent monster.                                        \
          He may feel shame in front of comrades.\
          He may pity my old age. For he, too,\
          has a father, one just like me, Peleus,                                                          \
          who sired and raised him to butcher Trojans.\
          On me especially he\'92s loaded sorrow,\
          more than on any other man. He\'92s killed\
          so many of my sons, all in their prime.\
          But, despite that sorrow, I don\'92t grieve\
          for all of them as much as I do for one,\
[530] for Hector. The sharp pain I feel for him                                         \
          will bring me down to the house of Hades.\
          If only he had died here in my arms,\
          we could have had our fill of weeping,\
          of lamentation\'97me and his mother,\
          who gave birth to him, to her own sorrow.\'94\
          \
          As he said this, Priam wept. The townsfolk mourned.\
          Hecuba led Trojan women in their loud laments:                                               \
          \
          \'93My child, how can I live with this misery,\
          such wretched sorrow, now that you are dead?\
[540] You were my pride and joy, night and day,                                              \
          and in the city, a blessing to us all,\
          to Trojan men and women in the state,\
          who received you like a god. To them\
          you were great glory when you were alive.\
          Now Death and Fate have overtaken you.\'94\
          \
          Hecuba spoke through her tears. But so far Hector\'92s wife\
          knew nothing of all this, for no messenger\
          had come to tell her clearly that her husband\
          had remained outside the gates. She was in a room\
[550] inside their lofty home, weaving purple fabric                                                   \
          for a double cloak, embroidering flowers on it.\
          She\'92d told her well-groomed servants in the house\
          to place a large tripod on the fire, so Hector\
          could have a hot bath when he came home from battle.\
          Poor fool! She\'92d no idea that a long way from that bath,\
          Athena with the glittering eyes had killed Hector\
          at Achilles\'92 hands. Then she heard the wailing,\
          laments coming from the walls. Her limbs began to shake.\
          The shuttle fell out of her hands onto the floor.\
[560] She spoke out once more to her well-groomed housemaids:               \
          \
          \'93Come here you two and follow me. Let\'92s see                                            \
          what\'92s happened. For I\'92ve just caught the sound\
          of my husband\'92s noble mother\'92s voice. In my chest,\
          my heart leapt in my mouth, my lower limbs\
          are numb. Something disastrous has taken place\
          to Priam\'92s children. I hope reports like these\
          never reach my ears, but I\'92m dreadfully afraid\
          that godlike Achilles may have cut off\
          my bold Hector from the city, driving him\
[570] into the plain all by himself, then ended                                        \
          that fearful courage which possessed him.\
          He\'92s never one to hold back or remain\
          within the crowd of men\'97he always moves ahead,\
          well in front, second to none in fury.\'94\
          \
          Saying this, she hurried through the house, heart pounding,                            \
          like some mad woman, accompanied by servants.\
          Once she reached the wall crowded with men, she stopped,\
          stood there, and looked out from the wall. She saw Hector\
          as he was being dragged past before the city,\
[580] with swift horses pulling him ruthlessly away                                        \
          to the Achaeans\'92 hollow ships. At the sight,\
          black night eclipsed her eyes. She fell back in a faint,\
          gasping her life away. From her head she threw off\
          her shining headdress\'97frontlet, cap, woven headband,\
          the veil that golden Aphrodite gave her                                                               \
          when Hector of the shining helmet led her\
          from E\'ebtion\'92s house as his wife, once he\'92d paid\
          an immense price for his bride. Around her\
          stood her husband\'92s sisters and his brother\'92s wives.\
[590] They all helped pick her up, almost dead from shock.                           \
          When she\'92d recovered and her spirit had returned,\
          she started her lament. In a sobbing voice,\
          she cried out to the Trojan women:\
          \
          \'93Ah, Hector,\
          how miserable I am. We both seem born\
          to a single fate, you in Priam\'92s house\
          in Troy, and I in E\'ebtion\'92s home\
          in wooded Thebe. He raised me from childhood,                                      \
          an ill-fated father and a child who\'92s doomed.\
          How I wish he\'92d never fathered me!\
[600] Now you go to Hades\'92 house deep underground,                           \
          abandoning me to bitter sorrow,\
          widowed in our home. Our son\'92s an infant,\
          born to wretched parents, you and me.\
          No good will come to him from you, Hector,\
          now that you\'92re dead, nor will he help you.\
          Even if he gets through this dreadful war\
          with the Achaeans, his life will always be\
          a constant pain and sorrow. For other men\
          will take away his lands. The day a child                                                      \
[610] becomes an orphan all his friends are gone.                                   \
          He cannot hold up his head for anyone,\
          his cheeks are wet from crying. In his need,\
          the child goes to his father\'92s comrades,\
          plucking one man\'92s cloak, another\'92s tunic.\
          Some pity him and then hold out a cup,\
          letting him for a moment wet his lips,\
          without moistening his palate. Another man\
          whose parents are still living pushes him\
          out of the feast, hitting him with his fist,\
          insulting him:\
          \
[620] \'91Go away, just as you are.                                                 \
          You\'92ve no father at our feast.\'92\
          \
          So, in tears,\
          the child returns to his widowed mother.\
          That child is our son Astyanax, who,                                                           \
          in earlier days on his father\'92s knees,\
          ate only marrow and rich fat from sheep.\
          When sleep overpowered him and he\'92d stopped\
          his childish play, he\'92d lie in his own bed,\
          in his nurse\'92s arms\'97on a soft couch,\
          his heart full of happy dreams. But now,\
[630] now that he\'92s missing his dear father,                                             \
          he\'92ll suffer much, our dear son Astyanax,\
          Lord of the City. Trojans called him this,\
          because you alone kept their gates safe from harm,\
          their towering walls. But now by the beaked ships,\
          far from your parents, wriggling worms will eat you,\
          once dogs have had their fill of your bare corpse.\
          In your home are lovely well-made clothes,                                               \
          produced by women\'92s hands. In a blazing fire\
          I\'92ll burn them all. They\'92re no use to you,\
          since you can\'92t wear them. So I\'92ll honour you,\
          on behalf of Trojan men and women.\'94\
          \
          Saying this, she wept. The women added their laments.}