{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf460
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural\qc

\f0\fs24 \cf0 Book Twenty Three\
The Funeral Games for Patroclus\

\i \
[Achilles keeps his troops together to mourn Patroclus; Patroclus' ghost visits Achilles, requesting a burial; Achaeans gather wood and prepare Patroclus' funeral pyre; Achilles cuts the hair dedicated to the river Spercheus; Achilles sacrifices animals and humans on Patroclus' pyre; Achilles gets the help of the winds to get the fire to light under Patroclus; Achilles brings out prizes for the Funeral Games, which then take place in series: the chariot race, boxing, wrestling, foot-racing, armed duelling, throwing a weight, archery, and spear throwing; Achilles awards Agamemnon the prize for the last event without any contest]\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\i0 \cf0           \
          Meanwhile, as Trojans were lamenting in the city,\
          Achaeans reached their ships beside the Hellespont.\
          There they scattered, each man going to his own ship.\
          But Achilles didn\'92t let his Myrmidons disband.\
          He spoke out to his warrior companions:\
          \'93Fast-riding Myrmidons, trusty comrades,\
          let\'92s not loose our sure-footed horses yet,\
          untying them from their chariots. We must go\
          with horse and chariot up to Patroclus,\
  [10] to mourn for him. For that\'92s a dead man\'92s right.                            \
          Once we\'92ve had our fill of sorrowful tears,                                                 \
          we\'92ll unyoke our horses, then all eat here.\'94\
          At these words, they all began their group lament,\
          led by Achilles. Three times around the body\
          they drove their well-groomed horses, mourning as they went.\
          Thetis stirred up in them a strong desire to weep.\
          Their tears made the sands wet, men\'92s armour, too,\
          for they were mourning the loss of a great warrior,\
          who\'92d made men flee. Peleus\'92 son led their loud lament,\
  [20] placing his man-killing hands on his comrade\'92s chest:                          \
          \'93Rest in peace, Patroclus, even though\
          you\'92re in Hades house, for I\'92m completing here                                         \
          all I promised you before\'97to drag in Hector,\
          then give him to the dogs to eat up raw,\
          and cut the throats of twelve young Trojans,\
          splendid children, on your funeral pyre,\
          in my rage that you\'92ve been slaughtered.\'94\
          He finished. Then he continued to dishonour\
          noble Hector, stretching his body out face down\
  [30] in the dirt, beside the bier of Menoetius\'92 son.                                         \
          Then each man took off his glittering bronze armour.\
          They untied their loud-neighing horses and sat down,\
          thousands of them, by swift-footed Achilles\'92 ship.\
          He prepared a funeral feast to ease their spirits.\
          Many sleek oxen bellowed underneath the knife,                                              \
          as they were butchered. Many sheep, bleating goats,\
          and white-tusked pigs rich in fat were laid out\
          to roast over Hephaestus\'92 fires. All around the corpse,\
          blood ran so thick men scooped it up in cupfuls.\
  [40] Then Achaean leaders led the swift-footed prince,                                 \
          son of Peleus, to lord Agamemnon.\
          They had trouble convincing him to go there\'97\
          his heart was still so angry for his comrade.\
          Reaching Agamemnon\'92s hut, they issued orders\
          for clear-voiced heralds to heat up a large cauldron,\
          to see if they could persuade Peleus\'92 son to wash,                                              \
          to rinse off the spattered blood. In his stubbornness,\
          he refused to do that, swearing this oath:\
          \
          \'93By Zeus,\
          highest and most excellent of all gods,\
  [50] it\'92s not right that water touch my head,                                          \
          until I\'92ve laid Patroclus on his fire,\
          piled up a burial mound, and shaved my hair,\
          since such grief will never reach my heart\
          a second time, not while I still remain\
          among the living. But for the moment,\
          let\'92s agree to dine, though I hate to eat.\
          In the morning, Agamemnon, king of men,\
          you must urge men to gather wood, arrange                                              \
          all things required for a man who\'92s died,\
  [60] as he goes below to murky darkness,                                              \
          so tireless fires can cremate him quickly\
          and remove him from our sight. Then soldiers\
          can resume their duties.\'94\
          \
          Achilles spoke.\
          They all listened to him and readily agreed.\
          Men all rushed out, prepared a meal, and dined,\
          eating to their heart\'92s content and sharing equally.\
          Once they\'92d satisfied their need for food and drink,\
          each man returned to his own hut to get some rest.\
          But Peleus\'92 son lay moaning loudly on the shore,\
  [70] beside the crashing sea, with many Myrmidons,                                                \
          in an open spot, where waves washed up on shore.\
          When sleep took hold of him and eased his aching heart\
          by sweetly flowing round him\'97for his splendid limbs\
          were tired out from chasing after Hector\
          by wind-swept Ilion\'97then poor Patroclus\
          came to him as a ghost, looking exactly like him\
          in all respects\'97in stature, handsome eyes, and voice.\
          He stood there, above Achilles\'92 head, body covered\
          with the same clothes he used to wear over his skin.\
          The ghost spoke to Achilles, saying:\
          \
  [80] \'93You\'92re asleep, Achilles.                                                \
          You\'92ve forgotten me. While I was alive,                                                      \
          you never did neglect me. But now I\'92m dead.\
          So bury me as quickly as you can.\
          Then I can pass through the gates of Hades.\
          The spirits, ghosts of the dead, keep me away.\
          They don\'92t let me join them past the river.\
          So I wander aimlessly round Hades\'92 home\
          by its wide gates. Give me your hand, I beg you,\
          for I\'92ll never come again from Hades,         \
  [90] once you\'92ve given me what\'92s due, my funeral fire.                         \
          We\'92ll no more sit together making plans,\
          separated from our dear companions.\
          The jaws of dreadful Fate are gaping for me,\
          ready to consume me\'97my destiny\
          from the day that I was born. You, too,\
          godlike Achilles, you have your own fate,                                                   \
          to die under the walls of wealthy Troy.\
          I\'92ll say one more thing, one last request,\
          if you will listen. Achilles, don\'92t lay your bones\
[100] apart from mine. Let them remain together,                                  \
          just as they were when we grew up in your home,\
          once Menoetius brought me as a youngster\
          into your land from Opoeis, for I\'92d done\
          a dreadful murder on that day I killed\
          Amphidamas\'92 son, in my foolishness.\
          I didn\'92t mean to, but I was enraged\
          over some game of dice. Horseman Peleus\
          welcomed me into his home, raised me\
          with love, then made me your attendant.                                                   \
[110] So let the same container hold our bones,                                      \
          that gold two-handled jar your mother gave you.\'94\
          Swift-footed Achilles then said in reply:\
          \'93Dear friend, why have you come to me here,\
          telling me everything I need to do?\
          I\'92ll carry out all these things for you,\
          attend to your request. But come closer.\
          Let\'92s hold each other one short moment more,\
          enjoying a shared lament together.\'94\
          Saying this, Achilles reached out with his arms,                                                 \
[120] but he grasped nothing. The spirit had departed,                                   \
          going underground like vapour, muttering faintly.\
          Achilles jumped up in amazement, clapped his hands,\
          and then spoke out in sorrow:\
          \
          \'93How sad!\
          It seems that even in Hades\'92 house,\
          some spirit or ghost remains, but our being\
          is not there at all. For this entire night\
          the ghost of poor Patroclus stood beside me,\
          weeping, lamenting, asking me to do things,\
          in every detail amazingly like him.\'94\
[130] Achilles\'92 words stirred the desire to keep mourning                              \
          in all of them. When rose-fingered Dawn appeared,\
          they were still lamenting by that cheerless corpse.                                            \
          Then mighty Agamemnon sent out men and mules,\
          from huts in every quarter, to gather wood.\
          The man who supervised was Meriones,\
          brave attendant to kind Idomeneus. They set off,\
          grasping axes to chop wood and well-woven rope.\
          The mules went on ahead. The men kept going,\
          up and down the slopes, sometimes tracking sideways,\
[140] sometimes doubling back, till they reached Ida\'92s foothills                   \
          with their many springs. At once they started working\'97\
          cutting high-branched oak trees with their long-edged bronze.\
          Men worked hard, falling each tree with a mighty crash.\
          Achaeans then split the trees into convenient lengths,                                     \
          tied logs behind the mules, whose feet ploughed up the ground\
          as they strained through thick underbrush towards the plain.\
          Woodsmen all carried logs as well, under orders\
          from Meriones, attendant to kind Idomeneus.\
          Men threw these logs down in a line along the shore,\
[150] where Achilles planned a massive burial mound                                    \
          for Patroclus and himself. When they\'92d piled up\
          immense amounts of wood on every side, they sat\
          all together there and waited. Then Achilles\
          quickly told war-loving Myrmidons to dress in bronze,                                    \
          ordering each man to get his horses harnessed\
          in their chariots. They leapt up to put on armour.\
          The warriors and charioteers climbed in their chariots\
          and moved out first. Then came the men on foot\
          in their thousands. In the middle, his companions\
[160] bore Patroclus, whose corpse they covered with the hair                      \
          they\'92d cut from their own heads and thrown onto the body.\
          Godlike Achilles came behind them, cradling\
          Patroclus\'92 head and grieving. For he was sending\
          down to Hades\'92 home a comrade without equal.\
          When they reached the spot Achilles chose for them,\
          they set the body down and quickly piled up wood\
          as he directed. Then swift-footed lord Achilles                                                   \
          thought of something. Standing some distance from the pyre,\
          he cut a lock of his own fair hair, one he\'92d grown\
[170] as a rich offering to the river Spercheus.                                                   \
          Looking out over the wine-dark sea, he spoke out\
          in passionate distress:\
          \
          \'93Spercheus, my father Peleus\
          promised you that, once I came back home\
          to my dear native land, I\'92d cut my hair\
          for you, then make a holy sacrifice,\
          offering up fifty uncastrated rams\
          to your waters, where you have your own estate\
          and fragrant altars. That oath was useless.\
          It\'92s what the old man swore, but you failed\
[180] to bring about what he desired. So now,                                         \
          since I\'92ll not be returning home again,                                                        \
          let me give this lock to warrior Patroclus\
          to carry with him.\'94\
          \
          Having said these words,\
          Achilles placed his hair in the hands of his dear comrade,\
          stirring up in each of them desire to lament.\
          Now they would have mourned till sunset, but Achilles\
          soon got up and said to Agamemnon:\
          \
          \'93Son of Atreus,\
          Achaean troops will listen to your words\
          more than to anyone. Men can grieve too much.\
[190] So dismiss them from the pyre for now.                                          \
          Tell them to prepare a meal. Those of us\
          with special cause to mourn will take care of this.\
          But let the leaders remain here with us.\'94                                                    \
          When Agamemnon, king of men, heard these words,\
          he quickly sent the troops off to their balanced ships.\
          The chief mourners stayed behind. They piled up wood,\
          making a square pyre, each side one hundred feet in length.\
          On that pyre\'92s highest point they laid out the corpse,\
          hearts full of sorrow. Then, in front of the pyre,\
[200] they flayed and made ready many sturdy sheep                                      \
          and shambling cattle with twisting horns. From all these,\
          great-hearted Achilles took the fat, using it\
          to cover up the corpse from head to foot, piling\
          skinned carcasses around it. Next, he placed on top\
          two-handled jars of oil and honey, leaning them                                                \
          against the bier. Then, crying with grief, Achilles\
          threw four strong-necked horses quickly on the pyre.\
          Patroclus had owned nine dogs who ate beside his table.\
          Slitting the throats of two of them, Achilles\
[210] tossed them on the pyre. Then, with his bronze, he butchered            \
          those twelve noble sons of the courageous Trojans,\
          his feelings grimly set on this atrocity.\
          After that, he lit the fire to work its iron force\
          and burn up everything. With a groan he called out,\
          addressing his companion:\
          \
          \'93Rest in peace,\
          Patroclus, though you\'92re in Hades\'92 house.\
          For I\'92m now completing everything                                                             \
          I promised you before. Flames will burn\
          twelve noble sons of great-hearted Trojans,\
[220] all cremated with you. But as for Hector,                                       \
          Priam\'92s son, I\'92ll not feed him to the fire,\
          but to the dogs.\'94         \
          \
          Achilles made this threat,\
          but dogs would not touch Hector. For Aphrodite,\
          Zeus\'92 daughter, kept them away, day and night.\
          She covered him with immortal oil of roses,\
          so Achilles would not wear away his body\
          by dragging him around. Phoebus Apollo\
          brought a dark cloud from the sky across the plain,\
          shadowing the entire place where Hector lay,                                                     \
[230] to stop Sun\'92s power from shrivelling up the flesh                                   \
          on limbs and sinews.\
          \
          But now the pyre of dead Patroclus\
          would not catch fire. So swift-footed Achilles\
          thought of something else. Standing away from the pyre,\
          he prayed to the two winds\'97Boreas of the north,\
          Zephyrus of the west\'97promising fine offerings.\
          Pouring frequent libations from a golden cup,\
          he begged them to come quickly to ignite the wood,\
          so flames might incinerate the corpses  quickly.\
          Hearing his prayer, Iris at once took his message\
[240] to the winds, who were feasting all together                                                     \
          in blustery West Wind\'92s home. Iris raced up there,\
          then stood on the stone threshold. Their eyes soon saw her.\
          They all jumped up, each one inviting her to sit\
          beside him. Iris declined their invitation,\
          saying to them:\
          \
          \'93I can\'92t sit down. I must return\
          to Oceanus\'92 stream, back in the land\
          of Ethiopians, where there\'92s a sacrifice\
          to the immortals. I\'92d like to be there\
          for that sacred feast. But now Achilles\
[250] prays that North Wind and loud West Wind will come.             \
          He\'92s promising you splendid offerings\
          to stir the flames, so they burn up the pyre                                                \
          where Patroclus lies, whom all Achaea mourns.\'94\
          After saying this, Iris left. The two winds rose up.\
          With an astounding roar, driving clouds before them,\
          they quickly stormed across the sea, whipping up waves\
          with their howling breath. They came to fertile Troy,\
          then fell upon that pyre. The fire crackled up\
          into a prodigious blaze. All night long they howled,\
[260] blowing their shrill blasts together on the flames.                                 \
          And all night long with a two-handled cup in hand\
          swift Achilles kept drawing wine from a golden bowl\
          and pouring it upon the earth, soaking the ground                                            \
          and calling on the spirit of poor Patroclus.\
          Just as a father mourns his son, when he burns his bones,\
          his newly married son, whose death brings parents\
          dreadful sorrow\'97that\'92s how Achilles kept crying then,\
          as he burned his companion\'92s bones, dragging himself\
          round and round the pyre, lamenting endlessly.\
[270] But at that hour when the Morning Star appears,                                   \
          announcing that light is coming to the earth,\
          the star after which Dawn in her yellow robe\
          moves out across the sea, by then the fire was dying.\
          The flames went out. So the winds returned once more,\
          back to their homes, going across the Thracian Sea,                                          \
          where a seething storm roared out. Then Peleus\'92 son,\
          moving away from the smouldering pyre, lay down\
          exhausted. Sweet Sleep quickly slipped around him.\
          But then the troops came up with Agamemnon,\
[280] all together. The noise they made, as they marched in,                         \
          woke up Achilles. Sitting bolt upright, he said:\
          \'93Sons of Atreus and you other leaders\
          of Achaean forces, you must first douse\
          the smouldering pyre with gleaming wine\'97\
          everything the powerful flames have touched.\
          Then we\'92ll collect bones from Patroclus,\
          Menoetius\'92 son, separating them with care\
          from all the rest. They\'92re easy to distinguish,                                            \
          for he lay in the centre of the pyre\'97\
[290] the others burned some distance from him                                    \
          on the edges, the humans and the horses.\
          Let\'92s place his bones inside a golden urn,\
          in a double layer of fat, until the time\
          I myself am hiding there in Hades.\
          I\'92m asking you to build a burial mound,\
          nothing excessive\'97what seems appropriate.\
          You Achaeans must build it high and wide,\
          but later, once I\'92m gone, those who still remain\
          beside our ships with many oars.\'94\
          \
          Once Achilles spoke,\
[300] they did as the swift-footed son of Peleus wished.                                 \
          First, they doused the smoking pyre with gleaming wine,                                \
          wherever flames had reached or ash was deep.\
          Weeping, they picked the white bones of their comrade out\
          and put them in a double layer of fat inside a golden urn.\
          They placed the urn under soft linen in a hut.\
          Then they traced out the dimensions of a mound,\
          using stones to mark its base around the pyre,\
          and then piled earth on top.\
          \
          When they\'92d made the mound,\
          they started to return. But Achilles checked them,\
[310] keeping soldiers there. He asked them to sit down                               \
          in a wide group. Then he brought prizes from his ship\'97\
          cauldrons, tripods, horses, mules, powerful oxen,                                              \
          as well as fine-dressed women and grey iron.\
          First, he set out prizes for swift charioteers\'97\
          for the winner, a woman skilled in fine handicrafts\
          and a tripod with handles holding twenty measures.\
          For second place he led out a mare six years old,\
          unbroken and with a mule foal in her womb.\
          For the man who came in third, he set out a cauldron\
[320] untouched by fire, a fine piece which held four measures.                    \
          For fourth place he set a prize of two gold talents,\
          while the fifth-place prize was a two-handled bowl,                                          \
          not yet put on the fire. Then Achilles stood up\
          and spoke directly to the Argives:\
          \
          \'93Sons of Atreus,\
          you other well-armed Achaean warriors,\
          these prizes lie set out here for a contest\
          among the charioteers. If Achaeans\
          were now hosting these games for someone else,\
          then I myself would surely win first prize\
[330] and take it to my hut, since, as you know,                                      \
          my horses are far better than the rest,\
          for they\'92re immortal, Poseidon\'92s gift\
          to Peleus, my father, who gave them to me.\
          But I and my sure-footed horses now\
          will stand down, for they\'92ve lost their charioteer,                                     \
          a strong, brave man, so kind he\'92d often pour\
          soft oil all through their manes, while washing them\
          in clean water. They stand there mourning him,\
          manes trailing on the ground. So they won\'92t race.\
[340] Their hearts feel too much grief. But you others,                          \
          get yourselves prepared all through the camp,\
          any Achaean who has faith in his own horses\
          and his well-made chariot.\'94\
          \
          Once Achilles finished speaking,\
          swift charioteers rushed into action. First to move,\
          well before the rest, was Eumelus, king of men,\
          dear son of Admetus and excellent with horses.\
          After him came forward mighty Diomedes,                                                         \
          son of Tydeus, driving those yoked horses\
          from Tros\'92 herd, which he\'92d just taken from Aeneas,\
[350] though Apollo had snatched away their owner.                                      \
          After Diomedes came fair-haired Menelaus,\
          royal son of Atreus, driving a yoked team,\
          two fast creatures\'97his own horse Podargus\
          and Agamemnon\'92s mare Aethe, which Echepolus,\
          Anchises\'92 son, had given to Agamemnon\
          as a gift, so he wouldn\'92t have to go with him\
          to wind-swept Ilion, but could remain at home,\
          enjoying himself, for Zeus had given him great wealth.\
          He lived in spacious Sicyon. This was the mare                                                  \
[360] Menelaus now led up in harness, a racehorse                                          \
          filled with a desire to run. The fourth contestant,\
          Antilochus, got his fair-maned horses ready.\
          He was a noble son of proud king Nestor,\
          son of Neleus. Swift-footed horses bred at Pylos\
          pulled his chariot. His father came up to him\
          to give him practical advice, a wise man speaking\
          to one who could appreciate another\'92s skill:\
          \'93Antilochus, you may still be quite young,\
          but Zeus and Poseidon have been fond of you.\
[370] They\'92ve taught you all sorts of things with horses,                       \
          so there\'92s no need to issue you instructions.\
          You understand well how to wheel around\
          beside the turning post. But your horses\
          are the slowest in the race, and so I think                                                   \
          you\'92ve got some problems here to deal with.\
          The others\'92 horses may be faster runners,\
          but the drivers are no better skilled than you.\
          So, dear boy, fix your mind on all that skill,\
          so those prizes don\'92t elude you. You know,\
[380] skill in a woodsman matters more than strength.                         \
          It\'92s skill that lets a helmsman steer his course,\
          guiding his swift ship straight on wine-dark seas.\
          And it\'92s skill, too, that makes one charioteer\
          go faster than another. Some racing drivers,\
          trusting their chariot and horses, drive them\
          carelessly, moving back and forth, weaving                                                \
          on the course. They don\'92t control their horses.\
          But a cunning man, though he\'92s got worse horses,\
          keeps his eye on that turning point, cutting\
[390] the pillar close. Such a man also understands                                \
          how to urge his horses on, right at the start,\
          using leather reins. But he keeps control.\
          His mind doesn\'92t wander, always watching\
          the man in front. Now I\'92ll tell you something\'97\
          there\'92s a marker, so clear you cannot miss it.\
          It\'92s a dry stump of oak or pine standing\
          about six feet high. Rain hasn\'92t rotted it.\
          On both sides of that stump, two white stones\
          are firmly fixed against it. At that spot\
[400] the race course narrows, but the ground is smooth,                      \
          so a team can wheel around that stump.                                                     \
          It may be a memorial to some man\
          long dead, or perhaps men placed it there\
          to serve as a racing post in earlier times.\
          Swift-footed lord Achilles has made that stump\
          his turning point. You need to shave that post,\
          drive in really close as you wheel around\
          your chariot and horses. You should lean out\
          from that well-sprung platform, to your horses\'92 left,\
[410] giving the right-hand horse the lash, calling                                  \
          to him with a shout, while with your hands\
          you let him take the reins. The inside horse\
          must graze the post, so the well-built wheel hub\
          seems to scrape the pillar. But be careful\'97\
          don\'92t touch the stone, because if you do,                                                    \
          you\'92ll hurt the horses, you\'92ll smash the chariot,\
          which will delight the others but shame you.\
          So, dear boy, take care and pay attention.\
          If you can pass them by as you catch up\
[420] right by the turning post, then none of them                                 \
          will reach you with a sudden burst of speed,\
          much less overtake you, no, not even\
          if he were driving godlike Arion\
          behind you, that swift horse of Adrestus,\
          from heavenly stock, or the very horses\
          of king Laomedon, the finest ones bred here.\'94\
          Nestor, Neleus\'92 son, spoke and sat down in his place,\
          once he\'92d gone over all the details with his son.                                                 \
          Then Meriones, the fifth contestant in the race,\
[430] harnessed his fine-maned horses, and all the racers                              \
          climbed in their chariots. They gathered up the lots,\
          which Achilles shook. The first to tumble out\
          was for Antilochus, Nestor\'92s son. Mighty Eumelus\
          was next, then came spearman Menelaus,\
          son of Atreus. After him, Meriones\
          drew his place. Last of all, and by far the best,\
          Tydeus\'92 son drew for his horses\'92 lane.\
          They took their places in a line. Then Achilles\
          showed them the turning point far out on the plain.\
[440] Beside it he\'92d placed an umpire, godlike Phoenix,                                            \
          his father\'92s follower, to observe the racing\
          and report back truthfully. Then all together,\
          they raised their whips above their horses, lashed them\
          with the reins, and shouted words of encouragement\
          to urge them forward. The horses raced off quickly,\
          galloping swiftly from the ships. Under their chests\
          dust came up, hanging there like storm clouds in a whirlwind.\
          In the rushing air their manes streamed back. The chariots,\
          at one moment, would skim across the nourishing earth,\
[450] then, at another, would bounce high in the air.                                       \
          Their drivers stood up in the chariots, hearts pounding,                                   \
          as they strove for victory. Each man shouted out,\
          calling his horses, as they flew along that dusty plain.\
          When the swift horses were starting the last stretch,\
          racing back to the grey sea, their pace grew strained.\
          Then the drivers each revealed his quality.\
          The swift-footed horses of Eumelus raced ahead,\
          followed by Diomedes\'92 team from Tros\'92 breed\
          not far behind\'97really close, almost as if they\'92d charge\
[460] right up the back of Eumelus\'92 chariot.                                                      \
          Their breath felt hot on his broad shoulders and his back,                               \
          for, as they ran ahead, they leaned right into him.\
          Now Tydeus\'92 son would have passed Eumelus,\
          or made the issue doubtful, if Phoebus Apollo,\
          angry at him, hadn\'92t struck the shining whip\
          out of his hand. Then from Diomedes\'92 eyes\
          tears of rage streamed out, once he saw Eumelus\'92 team\
          running even faster than before, while his own\
          were at a disadvantage, running with no whip.\
[470] But Athena had observed Apollo as he fouled                                         \
          the son of Tydeus. She came running at top speed\
          after that shepherd of his people, then gave back                                               \
          his whip, putting strength into his horses.\
          Then, in anger, she went after the son of Admetus.\
          The goddess snapped his chariot yoke. The horses swerved,\
          running all around the course. The shaft dropped down\
          and hit the ground\'97this threw Eumelus from the chariot\
          beside the wheel. On his elbows, mouth, and nose\
          the skin was badly scraped. Above his eyebrows,\
[480] his forehead had a bruise. His two eyes filled with tears,                     \
          his strong voice failed him. Tydeus\'92 son swerved aside,\
          then drove his sure-footed horses far ahead,\
          outdistancing the rest, for Athena had put strength                                           \
          into his team, to give Diomedes glory.\
          Behind him came Atreus\'92 son, fair-haired Menelaus.\
          But then Antilochus called to his father\'92s horses:\
          \'93Get going, you two. Push yourselves. Move up now,\
          as fast as you can go. I\'92m not asking you\
          to try to beat those horses up ahead,\
[490] the team of that warlike son of Tydeus,                                          \
          whom Athena has just helped run faster\
          to give their driver glory. But overtake\
          those horses of the son of Atreus\'97\
          quick now\'97don\'92t let them get too far ahead.\
          You don\'92t want to suffer shame from Aethe,\
          who\'92s just a mare. Why are you falling back,\
          you strong horses? Let me tell you something                                           \
          which is sure to happen\'97if you slack off now\
          and I win some inferior prize, then Nestor,\
[500] his people\'92s shepherd, will stop feeding you.                                 \
          He\'92ll take out his sharp bronze and kill you both,\
          here and now. So keep on after them.\
          Pick up the pace\'97as fast as you can run!\
          My task will be to think of something,\
          devise a way of getting past them there,\
          where the road  narrows. I won\'92t miss my chance.\'94\
          Antilochus finished. His horses, frightened\
          by their master\'92s threat, ran faster for a stretch.\
          Suddenly brave Antilochus saw up ahead\
[510] a place where the road was hollowed out and narrow,                                     \
          with a channel in the ground where winter rains\
          had backed the water up, washing out some of the road\
          and making all the ground subside. Menelaus\
          was coming to this spot, leaving no space at all\
          for a second chariot to move along beside him.\
          But Antilochus guided his sure-footed horses\
          off the track, charging up a little to one side.\
          Atreus\'92 son, alarmed, shouted at Antilochus:\
          \'93Antilochus, you\'92re driving like an idiot!\
[520] Pull your horses back! The road\'92s too narrow.                                \
          It gets wider soon\'97you can pass me there!\
          Watch you don\'92t hit me. You\'92ll make us crash!\'94    \
          Menelaus shouted, but Antilochus kept going,\
          moving even faster and laying on the whip,                                                         \
          as if he hadn\'92t heard. They raced on like this\
          about as far as a discus flies when tossed\
          with a shoulder swing by a powerful young man\
          testing his strength. But then the son of Atreus\'92 team\
          slowed down and fell behind, reined in deliberately,\
[530] in case the sure-footed teams somehow collided                                   \
          and overturned their well-sprung chariots in the road,\
          leaving their drivers, for all their eagerness to win,\
          sprawling in the dust. Then fair-haired Menelaus,\
          in anger at Antilochus, yelled out:\
          \
          \'93Antilochus,\
          you\'92re more reckless than any man alive!\
          Damn you! Achaeans were all wrong to think                                            \
          you were a man with some intelligence.\
          But even so, you still may not win the prize,\
          without the need to swear you won it fairly.\'94\
[540] Menelaus yelled this, then called out to his horses:                               \
          \'93Don\'92t slow down or stand there sad at heart.\
          Their feet and limbs will tire before yours do,\
          for those two horses are no longer young.\'94\
          Menelaus spoke. Excited by their master\'92s shout,\
          his horses ran on even faster.\
          \
          Meanwhile, the Argives,\
          sitting all together, kept watching for the horses\
          racing on the dusty plain. The first to spot them                                                \
          was Idomeneus, leader of the Cretans.\
          He sat some distance from the crowd, in a higher spot,\
[550] a fine lookout. The man in front was still far off,                                    \
          but when he called his horses, Idomeneus\
          recognized his voice and could see quite clearly\
          the horse in front\'97it was all brown, with a mark\
          as round and white as a full moon on his forehead.\
          Idomeneus stood up and called out to the Argives:\
          \'93My friends, leaders and rulers of Argives,\
          am I the only one to see those horses,\
          or can you glimpse them, too? It seems to me\
          that another team is now in front,\
[560] with another charioteer approaching.                                                        \
          Going out, Eumelus\'92 mares were in the lead,\
          but they must have run into some trouble\
          out there, somewhere on the plain. I saw them\
          wheeling round the turning post in front.\
          Now I can\'92t see them anywhere, though my eyes\
          keep searching the entire Trojan plain.\
          Perhaps the charioteer let go the reins\
          and couldn\'92t guide his chariot round the post\
          and failed to make the turn. I think he fell\
[570] out there somewhere and smashed his chariot.                             \
          His horses must have panicked in their hearts\
          and run away. But stand up. Look for yourselves.\
          I can\'92t see all that clearly, but the man                                                        \
          seems to be of Aetolian descent,\
          an Argive king, mighty Diomedes,\
          son of horse-taming Tydeus.\'94\
          \
          At that point,\
          swift Ajax, son of O\'efleus, mocked Idomeneus\
          with these insulting words:\
          \
          \'93Idomeneus,\
          why are you always nattering? Those prancing mares\
[580] are still far distant, with a lot more ground                                    \
          to race across. And of all the Argives here\
          you\'92re not the youngest\'97those eyes in your head\
          don\'92t have the keenest vision. But for all that,\
          you still chatter on. You don\'92t need to babble,\
          when there are better men than you around.\
          Those same mares as before are out in front,                                             \
          Eumelus\'92 team, and he\'92s standing there, as well,\
          holding the reins.\'94\
          \
          The leader of the Cretans,\
          furious with Ajax, then replied:\
          \
          \'93You\'92re great at insults,\
[590] Ajax, but really stupid. In everything,                                              \
          you\'92re the most useless Argive of them all,\
          because your mind is dull. Come on then,\
          let\'92s bet a tripod or a cauldron on it\'97\
          which horses are in front\'97so you\'92ll learn\
          by having to pay up. As our umpire,\
          let\'92s have Agamemnon, son of Atreus.\'94\
          At Idomeneus\'92 words, swift Ajax, son of O\'efleus,\
          jumped up at once, in a rage, ready to answer\
          with more angry words. At that point, their quarrel                                          \
[600] might have got much worse, but Achilles himself                                  \
          stood up and said:\
          \
          \'93No more of this,\
          Idomeneus and Ajax, no more angry words,\
          no more insults\'97that\'92s not appropriate.\
          You\'92d both feel angry if another man\
          behaved this way. So sit down with the group\
          and watch for horses. It won\'92t be long\
          before their eagerness to win brings them here.\
          Then you can both see the Argive horses,\
          who\'92s in the lead and who\'92s behind.\'94\
[610] As Achilles spoke, Tydeus\'92 son came charging in                                    \
          really close to them. He kept swinging his whip                                                \
          down from the shoulder, so his horses raced ahead,\
          raising their hooves up high as they ran the course.\
          Clouds of dust kept falling on the charioteer,\
          as his chariot made of gold and tin raced on,\
          drawn by swift-running horses, who left behind\
          only a slight trace of wheel rims in the dust,\
          as the team flew speeding by. Diomedes pulled up\
          right in the middle of the crowd. Streams of sweat\
[620] dripped from the horses\'92 necks and chests onto the ground.                \
          He jumped down from his gleaming chariot, leaning the whip                        \
          against the yoke. Strong Sthenelus didn\'92t wait for long\
          to get the prizes\'97he retrieved them right away,\
          giving the woman to his proud comrades to lead off\
          and the two-handled tripod to carry with them.\
          Then he untied the horses from their harnesses.\
          Next in came the horses driven by Antilochus,\
          grandson of Neleus, who just beat Menelaus\'97\
          he won by cunning, not by his horses\'92 speed.\
[630] But Menelaus was bringing his swift horses in                                       \
          very close behind. The space between the two\
          was as far as a horse is from the chariot wheel,\
          when it strains to pull its master fast across the plain\'97\
          its tail ends touch the spinning wheels behind it\'97                                           \
          there\'92s not much space between them, as they move\
          at top speed on the plain\'97that\'92s about how far\
          Menelaus lagged behind noble Antilochus.\
          At first, he\'92d been about a discus throw behind,\
          but he was quickly catching up, for the spirit\
[640] in Agamemnon\'92s mare, the fair-maned Aethe,                                        \
          kept getting stronger. Had the course been longer\
          for both contestants, he\'92d have surely passed him,\
          without leaving the result in doubt. The next one in\
          was Meriones, Idomeneus\'92 brave attendant,\
          a spear-throw length behind splendid Menelaus.\
          His horses were the slowest, and he himself                                                       \
          had the least skill at driving in a chariot race.\
          Last one in was Admetus\'92 son, well behind the rest,\
          driving his horses in front of him and pulling\
[650] his chariot behind. Seeing Eumelus coming in,                                       \
          swift-footed lord Achilles felt sorry for him.\
          Standing among Argives, he spoke his words had wings:\
          \'93The best man brings up his sure-footed horses\
          in last place. Come, let\'92s give him a prize,\
          as seems fitting\'97the award for second place.\
          Let Diomedes take the first-place prize.\'94\
          Achilles spoke. They all agreed with his suggestion.\
          So now he would have given Eumelus the mare,                                                 \
          as Achaeans had agreed, but Antilochus,\
[660] great-hearted Nestor\'92s son, stood up to claim his right.                        \
          Addressing Achilles, son of Peleus, he said:\
          \'93Achilles, I\'92ll be angry with you,\
          if you carry out what you\'92ve proposed.\
          For you want to rob me of my prize,\
          claiming that his chariot and swift horses\
          ran into trouble\'97as he did himself,\
          though he\'92s an excellent charioteer.\
          But he should have prayed to the immortals\'97\
          in the race he would not have finished last.\
[670] If you\'92re feeling sorry for Eumelus,                                                   \
          if he\'92s someone your heart is fond of,\
          in your hut there\'92s lots of gold. You\'92ve got bronze,\
          sheep, women slaves, and sure-footed horses.                                           \
          Why not take some of that and then give him\
          an even greater prize sometime later on?\
          Or do it now. Achaeans will applaud you.\
          But I won\'92t give up the mare. If someone\
          wants her, let him try doing battle with me,\
          hand to hand.\'94\
          \
          Antilochus finished speaking.\
[680] Swift-footed, god-like Achilles smiled, delighted                                   \
          with Antilochus, who was a close companion.\
          In reply, he spoke these winged words:\
          \
          \'93Antilochus,\
          if you\'92re telling me to give Eumelus\
          some other prize inside my huts, I\'92ll do it.\
          I\'92ll give him the breastplate I took away                                                     \
          from Asteropaeus. It\'92s made of bronze,\
          with a casting of bright tin around it.\
          For Eumelus it will have great value.\'94\
          After saying this, Achilles ordered Automedon,\
[690] his close companion, to fetch the breastplate from the hut.                 \
          He went and brought it back and gave it to Eumelus,\
          who was delighted to receive the armour.\
          But then Menelaus stood up before them all.\
          His heart was bitter with unremitting anger\
          against Antilochus. A herald put the sceptre\
          in Menelaus\'92 hand, then shouted out for silence\
          among the Argives. God-like Menelaus spoke:\
          \
          \'93Antilochus, you used to have good sense,                                                 \
          before all this. Now look at what you\'92ve done.\
[700] You\'92ve brought my skills here into disrepute,                                \
          fouling my horses when you hurled your team\
          in front of me out there, that team of yours\
          which is far inferior to mine. Come now,\
          you leaders and rulers of the Argives,\
          judge between the two of us\'97and fairly,\
          so Achaeans armed in bronze will never say,\
          \'91Menelaus beat Antilochus with lies,\
          when he received that mare. Though his horses\
          were much slower, he used his influence,\
          his rank and power.\'92\
          \
[710] In fact, I myself                                                          \
          will judge the case, and no Danaan,\
          I claim, will find fault with me in any way,                                                 \
          for justice will be done. Antilochus,\
          come here, my lord, and, as our customs state,\
          stand there before your chariot and horses,\
          holding that thin whip you used before.\
          With your hand on your horses, swear an oath,\
          by the god who surrounds and shakes the earth,\
          that you didn\'92t mean to block my chariot\
          with some trick.\'94\
          \
[720] Antilochus, a prudent man, replied:                                  \
          \'93Don\'92t let me offend you, king Menelaus.\
          I\'92m a younger man than you\'97you\'92re my senior\
          and my better. You know how a young man          \
          can do foolish things. His mind works quickly,                                         \
          but his judgment\'92s suspect. So be patient\
          in your heart. That mare I was awarded\
          I freely give you. And if you requested\
          something greater from my own possessions,\
          I\'92d want to give it to you right away,\
[730] rather than lose your good will, my lord,                                        \
          for ever and offend against the gods.\'94\
          The son of great-hearted Nestor finished speaking.\
          He led out the horse, then placed it in the hands\
          of Menelaus, whose heart melted like the dew\
          on ripening ears of corn, when fields are bristling\
          with the crop\'97that\'92s how, Menelaus, your heart                                               \
          softened in your chest. He spoke to Antilochus\'97\
          his words had wings:\
          \
          \'93Now, indeed, Antilochus,\
          I\'92ll give up my anger with you. Before now,\
[740] you haven\'92t been too reckless or a fool.                                          \
          This time your youth overcame your judgement.\
          In future, you shouldn\'92t try to do such tricks\
          against your betters. Another Achaean\
          would not have won me over quite so fast.\
          But you\'92ve worked very hard, endured a lot\'97\
          you, your noble father, and your brother\'97\
          in my cause. So I\'92ll agree to your request.\
          What\'92s more, though she\'92s mine, I\'92ll give you the mare,                           \
          so all these people here will recognize\
[750] my heart\'92s not arrogant or unyielding.\'94                                           \
          Saying this, Menelaus gave the mare to No\'ebmon,\
          a comrade of Antilochus, to lead away.\
          Menelaus carried off the shining cauldron.\
          Meriones then collected the two talents\
          for his fourth-place finish. But the prize for fifth place,\
          the two-handled jar, went unclaimed. So Achilles\
          awarded it to Nestor. Carrying the prize\
          into the crowd of Argives, he stood beside him.\
          Then Achilles said:\
          \
          \'93Take this now, old man.\
[760] Let it be your treasure, in memory                                                   \
          of Patroclus\'92 burial. For you\'92ll see him                                                        \
          no more among the Argives. This prize\
          I\'92m giving you without a contest.\
          For you won\'92t be competing as a boxer,\
          or in wrestling, or the spear throw.\
          Nor will you be running in the foot race.\
          For old age now has you in its cruel grip.\'94\
          With these words, Achilles placed the jar in Nestor\'92s hands.\
          He was happy to accept it. Then Nestor spoke,\
[770] saying these winged words to Achilles:                                                    \
          \'93Indeed, my son, you\'92ve made a valid point.\
          For my limbs and feet are no longer firm,\
          my friend. Nor do I find it as easy\
          to extend my arms out from my shoulders,\
          as I did before. Would that I were young,\
          my strength as firm, as it was that day                                                        \
          Epeians buried lord Amarynceus\
          at Bouprasium. His sons awarded prizes\
          in honour of their king. No man could match me,\
[780] none of the Epeians, my own Pylians,                                              \
          nor any of the brave Aetolians.\
          In boxing I defeated Clytomedes,\
          Enops\'92 son, in wrestling Ancaeus,\
          from Pleuron, who fought against me.\
          In the footrace, I outran Iphicles,\
          who was outstanding, and in the spear throw,\
          I beat Phyleus and Polydorus.\
          I was beaten only in the chariot race\
          by the two sons of Actor. They pushed ahead,\
[790] for there were two of them, both really keen                                 \
          to win, because they\'92d set the greatest prize                                              \
          for that particular race. They were two twins.\
          One always held the reins\'97he was the driver.\
          The other used the whip. That\'92s the man I was,\
          back then, but now let younger men compete\
          in events like these. For I must follow\
          the dictates of a cruel old age these days,\
          though as a warrior I once excelled.\
          But come, you must continue with these games\
[800] to honour your companion. As for this gift,                                    \
          I accept it gladly. It delights my heart\
          that you think of me always as your friend.\
          You don\'92t forget the honours due to me\
          among Achaeans. May the gods grant you,\
          as a reward for that, your heart\'92s desires.\'94                                                  \
          Nestor finished. Once he\'92d heard all of Nestor\'92s story,\
          Peleus\'92 son moved through the large Achaean crowd.\
          Then he set out prizes for the painful contest\'97\
          the boxing. To the group he led out a sturdy mule,\
[810] an unbroken female, six years old, the hardest                                       \
          to break in. For the loser, he put out a cup,\
          one with two handles. Then Achilles, standing up,\
          addressed the Argives:\
          \
          \'93Son of Atreus,\
          all you other well-armed Achaeans,\
          for these prizes here we need two good men,\
          the best there are, to put up their fists and box.                                        \
          The one to whom Apollo gives endurance\
          and Achaeans all acknowledge winner,\
          let him then take this mule back to his hut.\
[820] The beaten man gets this two-handled cup.\'94                                 \
          Achilles\'92 words at once stirred into action\
          a strong, brave man, well skilled in boxing\'97Epeius,\
          son of Panopeus. Putting his hand on the mule,\
          Epeius said:\
          \
          \'93Let whoever\'92s going to get\
          the two-handled cup step forward. For I say this\'97\
          no Achaean will beat me with his fists\
          and take this mule. I claim I\'92m the winner.\
          I may not be the best in battle. So what?                                                    \
          A man can\'92t be well skilled in everything.\
[830] But I\'92ll say this\'97and what I say will happen\'97                              \
          I\'92ll break apart the skin and crush the bones\
          of the man who fights me. Those close to him\
          had better stay here in a single group\
          to help him off, once my fists have thrashed him.\'94\
          Epeius\'92 words reduced them all to silence.\
          The only one to stand up to oppose him\
          was godlike Euryalus, son of Mecisteus,\
          son of Talaus. He\'92d once come to Thebes,\
          for the funeral games of fallen Oedipus.\
[840] There he\'92d triumphed against all the sons of Cadmus.                                    \
          Famous spearman Diomedes helped him prepare,\
          encouraging Euryalus with his words\'97\
          he really wanted him to win the contest.\
          First, he set the loin cloth on him, then gave him\
          leather thongs, fine hide cut from a farmyard ox.\
          When the two men had laced up their hands, they strode\
          into the middle of the group. Raising their arms,\
          their powerful fists, they went at one another.\
          Their hands exchanged some heavy punches, landing\
[850] with painful crunches on their jaws. From their limbs                           \
          sweat ran down everywhere. Then Euryalus feinted,\
          but godlike Epeius moved and punched his cheek bone.                                   \
          Euryalus could not keep his feet for long.\
          His splendid limbs collapsed there on the spot\'97\
          as a fish jumps through the rippling surface water\
          in a forceful North Wind breeze near a weed-filled shore,\
          before a black wave hides it\'97that how Euryalus\
          jerked up as he was hit. But great-hearted Epeius\
          grabbed him and set him on his feet. Around him,\
[860] his close comrades gathered. They led him through the crowd            \
          spitting gobs of blood, dragging his feet behind him,\
          with his head down on one side. They took him off,\
          set him down with them, still semi-conscious,\
          then went themselves to collect the two-handled cup.\
          For the Danaans, Peleus\'92 son then set out                                                            \
          a display of prizes for the third contest,\
          the hard-fought wrestling match. The winning prize\
          was a huge tripod to place above a fire,\
          whose value among themselves Achaeans set\
[870] at twelve oxen. Into the middle of the crowd                                          \
          he then brought out the loser\'92s prize, a woman\
          skilled in every kind of work, worth four oxen.\
          Standing up among the Argives, Achilles said:\
          \
          \'93Step up now the two who\'92ll try this contest.\'94\
          At these words, great Telamonian Ajax got up,\
          as did Odysseus, the crafty master of deceit.\
          They strapped on their belts and strode out to the crowd,                               \
          then, with their powerful hands gripped each other\'92s elbows\'97\
          locked together like rafters on some lofty house,\
[880] fitted by skilled craftsmen to keep out blasts of wind.                          \
          Their backs cracked as their strong hands applied the pressure.\
          Streams of sweat poured down, and red blood welts appeared\
          across their ribs and shoulders, as both contestants\
          kept up their struggle to prevail and get the prize,\
          that well-made tripod. But it was impossible\
          for Odysseus to trip up Ajax or throw him down,\
          or for Ajax to do the same thing to Odysseus,                                                     \
          for Odysseus\'92 strength prevented him from that.\
          But when well-armed Achaeans started to get bored,\
[890] great Telamonian Ajax said to Odysseus:                                                \
          \'93Divinely born son of Laertes,\
          resourceful Odysseus\'97try lifting me,\
          or I\'92ll try lifting you. And we\'92ll let Zeus\
          decide the outcome.\'94\
          \
          Saying this, Ajax tried a lift.\
          But Odysseus did not forget his various tricks.\
          He kicked Ajax behind the knee, taking out his leg.\
          Ajax toppled backward, with Odysseus falling\
          on his chest. The spectators got excited then.\
          Next resilient, godlike Odysseus tried a lift.\
[900] He managed to move Ajax off the ground a bit,                                                \
          but couldn\'92t lift him. Then Ajax hooked him\
          with his leg around the knee, so the two men fell\
          close together on the ground, covered both in dust.\
          Now they would have jumped up to wrestle a third fall,\
          but Achilles himself came up and held them back.\
          \'93You two need not continue wrestling.\
          Don\'92t let the pain exhaust you. For both of you\
          are winners. You must take equal prizes.\
          Once you leave, other Achaeans can compete.\'94\
[910] Hearing these words, both men agreed. The two of them                     \
          cleaned their bodies of the dust and put on tunics.\
          After that, Peleus\'92 son quickly set out other prizes                                            \
          for the footrace\'97a finely crafted silver mixing bowl,\
          holding six measures. It was very beautiful,\
          the loveliest object in the world by far.\
          Sidonian experts in skilled handicrafts who made it\
          had shaped it well. Then Phoenician men had brought it\
          over the dark sea, unpacked it in the harbour,\
          and given it as a gift to Thoas, as ransom\
[920] for Lycaon, Priam\'92s son, paid by Euneus,                                                  \
          son of Jason, to warrior Patroclus. This bowl\
          Achilles set out as a prize to honour his companion,\
          a trophy for the man who in the footrace\
          proved he was the fastest. As prize for second place,                                         \
          he led out a huge ox, rich in fat. For third place,\
          he offered half a talent. Then Achilles stood up\
          and announced to the Achaeans:\
          \
          \'93Up all those of you\
          who want to make the effort for this prize.\'94\
          At that, swift O\'eflean Ajax jumped up at once.\
[930] Next came resourceful Odysseus and Nestor\'92s son                                 \
          Antilochus, who, of all the young men there,\
          could run the fastest. These men stood in line,\
          as Achilles pointed out the turning post\'97\
          the race course was the distance there and back.\
          The son of O\'efleus quickly raced in front,\
          with godlike Odysseus really close behind,\
          as close as the weaving bar comes to the breast                                                 \
          of a well-dressed woman when she deftly pulls it\
          in her hands to pass the weaving spool through thread,\
[940] keeping the rod against her chest\'97that\'92s how close                              \
          Odysseus ran behind, his feet hitting Ajax\'92s footprints\
          before the dust could settle there. Godlike Odysseus\
          ran so close, his breath touched the back of Ajax\'92s head.\
          All the Achaeans were cheering on Odysseus,\
          as he strove to win the race, yelling at him\
          to push his energy right to the limit.\
          While they were running the last section of the course,\
          Odysseus in his heart prayed to Athena,\
          goddess with the glittering eyes:\
          \
          \'93Hear me, goddess!                                                \
[950] Be good to me. Help me. Speed up my feet.\'94                                  \
          Odysseus prayed, and Pallas Athena heard him.\
          She made his legs, feet, and upper arms feel lighter.\
          Then, as they were about to sprint in for the prize,\
          Ajax slipped in mid stride\'97for Athena fouled him\'97\
          right where the bellowing cattle had dropped their dung\
          as they were slaughtered, the ones which swift Achilles\
          had killed in honour of Patroclus. So Ajax\
          finished with his mouth and nostrils full of dung,\
          as resilient Odysseus raced on ahead,\
[960] came in first, and won the prize. Ajax got the ox.                                   \
          He stood there, hands on the horn of that farmyard beast,                               \
          spitting out cow dung, and then said to the Argives:\
          \'93So the goddess played tricks with my feet\'97\
          the one that always helps Odysseus out,\
          taking care of him, just like a mother.\'94\
          \
          Ajax spoke.\
          They all had a good laugh at him. Antilochus\
          took the prize for coming last. He smiled, then said,\
          as he spoke to the Argives:\
          \
          \'93Friends, I\'92ll tell you this,\
          something you already know\'97immortal gods\
[970] still honour older men, even today.                                                 \
          Ajax is just a little older than myself,\
          but Odysseus comes from another time,                                                    \
          an older generation. But his greater age,\
          so people say, is green. Thus it\'92s difficult\
          for Achaeans to beat him in a race\'97\
          all except Achilles.\'94\
          \
          Antilochus finished speaking.\
          He\'92d acknowledged the swift-footed son of Peleus,\
          so Achilles answered him and said:\
          \
          \'93Antilochus,\
          you\'92ve not paid that tribute here for nothing.\
[980] I\'92ll add a gold half-talent to your prize.\'94                                         \
          With these words, Achilles handed him the gold.\
          Antilochus was very pleased to get it.\
          Next, the son of Peleus brought to the gathering\
          a long-shadowed spear. He set it down, and with it\
          a shield and helmet. It was Sarpedon\'92s armour,                                                  \
          which Patroclus had taken from him. Standing there,\
          Achilles then said to the Argives:\
          \
          \'93We\'92re calling for two men,\
          two of the best, to battle for these prizes,\
          clothed in armour, wielding their sharp bronze,\
[990] testing each other here before this crowd.                                      \
          Whichever man hits the other\'92s fair skin first,\
          under the armour, drawing his dark blood,\
          will get from me this silver-studded sword,\
          a lovely one from Thrace, which I seized\
          from Asteropaeus. Both men will take\
          this armour here, sharing it in common.\
          And in my hut we\'92ll get a banquet ready                                                     \
          for both of them.\'94\
          \
          Achilles finished.\
          Then great Telamonian Ajax moved out front,\
[1000] and strong Diomedes, son of Tydeus, got up.                                         \
          On each side of the crowd they armed themselves,\
          then both strode to the middle, prepared to fight,\
          both glaring fearfully. All Achaeans were then gripped\
          with anxious expectation. Once the two men\
          approached each other at close quarters, they attacked,\
          charging three times, three times going at it hand to hand.\
          Ajax struck through the even circle of the shield\
          of his opponent, but did not touch his flesh.\
          The breastplate kept his body guarded from the spear.\
[1010] Tydeus\'92 son was trying to aim his gleaming spear point                                \
          over the huge shield, to get Ajax in the neck.\
          But then Achaeans, in their fear for Ajax,\
          called for a halt and an award of equal prizes.\
          So Achilles gave the great sword to Diomedes\'97\
          the scabbard and the well-cut strap as well.\
          Then Peleus\'92 son put out a lump of rough-cast iron,\
          which, in earlier days, E\'ebtion had used for throwing.\
          Godlike, swift-footed Achilles had slaughtered him,\
          then taken his iron and all his other goods\
[1020] away in his swift ship. Achilles then stood up,                                                \
          and addressed the Argives:\
          \
          \'93Step up all those\
          who want to try this competition.\
          Whoever wins this iron can use it\
          to serve his needs for five successive years,\
          even though his rich fields are far away.\
          His herders and his ploughman will not need\
          to travel to the town through lack of iron.\
          This will give them all that they require.\'94\
          Achilles spoke. Then up came Polypoetes,\
[1030] a strong fighter, and godlike Leonteus,                                                   \
          a powerful man, then Telamonian Ajax,\
          and godlike Epeius. They stood there in a line.\
          Godlike Epeius gripped the weight, swung it round,\
          then threw. The Achaeans all laughed at the result.                                           \
          The second one to throw was Leonteus,\
          offshoot of Ares. Great Ajax, son of Telamon,\
          was third to throw. His strong hand tossed the weight,\
          hurling it beyond the marks of all the others.\
          But then that strong warrior Polypoetes\
[1040] picked up the weight and threw it even further                                     \
          than all those in the contest, by the same distance\
          a herdsman throws his staff, so it flies spinning\
          in among his cattle herd. The crowd all shouted.\
          Then the comrades of strong Polypoetes stood up\
          and carried off their king\'92s prize to the hollow ships.\
          Next, Achilles set out the prizes for the archers,                                                \
          things made of blackened iron\'97ten double axes\
          and ten with single blades. Then he set up,\
          far off in the sands, the mast of a dark-prowed ship.\
[1050] Attached to it with a slender cord, he placed                                         \
          a quivering dove with the cord tied to its foot.\
          He then told competitors to shoot the dove.\
          \
          \'93The man who hits it,\
          that quivering dove, can carry off\
          all these double axes. He can take them home.\
          If he misses the bird and hits the cord,\
          he\'92ll be less successful, but he\'92ll take as prize\
          these single-bladed axes.\'94\
          \
          Achilles finished speaking.\
          Powerful lord Teucer then got up, and Meriones,                                               \
          courageous attendant to lord Idomeneus.\
[1060] They took lots and shook them in a helmet made of bronze.              \
          Teucer\'92s lot gave him first attempt. He loosed an arrow,\
          a powerful shot, but he\'92d made no promise\
          to Apollo that he\'92d give a splendid offering\
          of new born lambs. So he failed to hit the bird\'97\
          Apollo wouldn\'92t give him that. But he hit the cord\
          tethering the bird near its foot and cut it.\
          The keen arrow sliced right through. The dove escaped,\
          flying up into the sky, chord dangling down\
          towards the ground. Achaeans then all cheered the shot.\
[1070] But Meriones quickly snatched the bow from Teucer.                                   \
          He\'92d been holding an arrow ready for some time,\
          as Teucer aimed. He offered up a rapid prayer\
          to Apollo, the far shooter, promising\
          he\'92d make a splendid sacrifice of new-born lambs.\
          He saw the trembling dove high up, under the clouds.\
          As she circled there, he shot her through the middle,\
          under the wing. The arrow passed straight through, falling\
          back to earth again. It struck by Meriones\'92 foot.\
          The dove fluttered to the mast of the dark-prowed ship,\
[1080] her head hung down, her wings drooped, as life                                             \
          fled quickly from her limbs. She fell from the mast\
          a long way to the ground. The crowd looked on amazed.\
          So Meriones carried off ten double axes,\
          while Teucer took back to his hollow ships\
          the single-bladed ones.\
          \
          Then Peleus\'92 son\
          brought out a long-shadowed spear and set it down\
          before the gathering and a brand new cauldron,\
          not yet touched by fire, with a floral pattern on it.\
          Its value was one ox. Then warriors got up\
[1090] for the spear-throw competition\'97the son of Atreus,                           \
          wide-ruling Agamemnon, and Meriones,\
          courageous attendant to lord Idomeneus.\
          But then swift-footed, godlike Achilles spoke:\
          \
          \'93Son of Atreus,                                                          \
          we know how you surpass all others,\
          how in the spear throw you\'92re much stronger,\
          better than anyone. So take this prize,\
          as you go to your hollow ships. Let\'92s give\
          the spear to warrior Meriones, if your heart\
          is pleased with that. It\'92s what I\'92d like to do.\'94\
[1100] Achilles spoke. Agamemnon, king of men, agreed.                               \
          The warrior king gave the spear to Meriones,\
          then handed his own prize, the lovely cauldron,\
          over to Talthybius, his herald.\
}