{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf460
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;\f1\froman\fcharset0 Times-Roman;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue0;}
\deftab720
\pard\pardeftab720\li1890\ri1890\sl440\sa266

\f0\fs36 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Book Twenty Four\
Achilles and Priam\
          \
[Achilles continues to mourn and to dishonour Hector's corpse; the gods debate his action; Zeus resolves to deal with the problem; Iris goes off to fetch Thetis; Zeus instructs Thetis to visit Achilles; Thetis tells Achilles Zeus' instructions;  Achilles agrees to give up Hector's body for ransom; Iris visits Priam, telling him to go to the Achaean ships; Hecuba objects to the trip; Priam insults his sons, then collects the ransom and leaves with Idaios, the herald; Zeus sends Priam an omen and tells Hermes to guide Priam to Achilles; Hermes meets Priam on the road; Hermes takes Priam to the Achaean camp; Priam meets Achilles; Achilles agrees to give back Hector; Achilles and Priam have dinner; Priam sleeps overnight outside Achilles hut; Priam and Idaios return to Troy with Hector's body; the women lament over Hector; the Trojans bury Hector
\f1 \uc0\u63743 
\f0 \
          \
           \
          \
          Once the funeral gathering broke up, the men dispersed,\
          each one going to his own ship, concerned to eat\
          and then enjoy sweet sleep. But Achilles kept on weeping,\
          remembering his dear companion. All-conquering Sleep\
          could not overcome him, as he tossed and turned,\
          longing for manly, courageous, strong Patroclus,\
          thinking of all he\'92d done with him, all the pain\
          they\'92d suffered, as they\'92d gone through wars with other men\
          and with the perilous sea. As he kept remembering,\
  [10] he cried heavy tears, sometimes lying on his side,                                 \
          sometimes on his back or on his face. Then he\'92d get up,                                   \
          to wander in distress, back and forth along the shore.\
          He\'92d see Dawn\'92s approach across the sea and beaches,\
          then he\'92d harness his fast horses to their chariot,\
          tie on Hector and drag him behind, driving\
          three times around the tomb of Menoetius\'92 dead son.\
          Then in his hut he\'92d rest again, leaving Hector\
          stretched out, face down in the dust. But Apollo,\
          feeling pity for Hector, though he was dead,\
  [20] guarded his skin from any lacerations,                                                     \
          covering his whole body with the golden aegis,                                                  \
          so as Achilles dragged him, he did not tear his skin.\
          Still Achilles kept dishonouring godlike Hector.\
          \
          Then the blessed gods, looking on, pitied Hector.\
          So they urged keen-eyed Hermes, killer of Argus,\
          to steal the corpse, an idea that pleased them all,\
          except for Hera, Poseidon, and Athena,\
          the girl with glittering eyes, who kept up the hatred\
          they\'92d felt when they first started to loathe Ilion,\
  [30] Priam and his people, for Alexander\'92s folly\'97                                          \
          he\'92d been contemptuous of those goddesses,\
          when they were visiting his sheep-fold, choosing\
          the one who volunteered to serve his dangerous lust.*                                     \
          But after the twelfth dawn had come since Hector\'92s death,\
          Phoebus Apollo spoke out to the immortals:\
          \
          \'93You gods are cruel and vindictive.\
          Did Hector never sacrifice to you,\
          burning thighs of perfect bulls and goats?\
          And can\'92t you now rouse yourself to save him,\
  [40] though he\'92s a corpse, for his wife, his mother,                               \
          and his child to look at, and for Priam, too,\
          his father, and the people, who\'92d burn him\
          with all speed and give him burial rites?\
          No, you want to help ruthless Achilles,\
          whose heart has no restraint. In that chest                                                 \
          his mind cannot be changed. Like some lion,\
          he thinks savage thoughts, a beast which follows\
          only its own power, its own proud heart,\
          as it goes out against men\'92s flocks, seeking\
  [50] a feast of cattle\'97that\'92s how Achilles                                               \
          destroys compassion. And in his heart\
          there\'92s no sense of shame, which can help a man\
          or harm him. No doubt, a man can suffer loss\
          of someone even closer than a friend\'97\
          a brother born from the same mother\
          or even a son. He pays his tribute\
          with his tears and his laments\'97then stops.\
          For Fates have put in men resilient hearts.\
          But this man here, once he took Hector\'92s life,                                           \
  [60] ties him behind his chariot, then drags him                                   \
          around his dear companion\'92s burial mound.\
          He\'92s done nothing to help or honour him.\
          He should take care he doesn\'92t anger us.\
          Though he\'92s a fine man, in this rage of his\
          he\'92s harming senseless dust.\'94\
          \
          Then Hera,\
          angry at Apollo, replied\
          \
          \'93Lord of the silver bow,\
          yes, indeed, what you say may well be true,\
          if you gods give Hector and Achilles\
          equal worth. But Hector is a mortal man,\
  [70] suckled at a woman\'92s breast, while Achilles                                   \
          is the child of a goddess I raised myself.                                                     \
          I brought her up and gave her to Peleus\
          to be his wife, a man dear to the hearts\
          of the immortal gods. All of you were there,\
          when they got married. You, too, were with us\
          at the banquet, you friend of evil men,\
          clutching your lyre, as slippery as ever.\'94\
          \
          Cloud gatherer Zeus then answered Hera, saying:\
          \
          \'93Hera, don\'92t get so angry with the gods.\
  [80] These two will not both share equal honours.                               \
          Still, of all mortal men in Ilion,\
          Hector was the favourite of the gods.\
          At least that\'92s what he was to me.\
          He never failed to offer me fine gifts.\
          At their communal feasts, my own altar\
          never went without the proper offerings,                                                    \
          libations and sacrificial smoke,\
          as is our right. But we\'92ll not let this corpse,\
          brave Hector\'92s body, be taken secretly.\
  [90] Achilles would for certain learn of it,                                              \
          since his mother sees him all the time,\
          both day and night. But one of the gods\
          should tell Thetis to come here before me,\
          so I can put a useful plan to her,\
          how Achilles can get gifts from Priam\
          and then give Hector back to him.\'94\
          \
          Once Zeus had spoken, storm-swift Iris rushed away,\
          bearing Zeus\'92 message. Half way between Samos\
          and rocky Imbros she plunged into the sea.\
[100] As waters roared above her, she sank way down,                                              \
          just as a plummet sinks when fastened to a lure,\
          one fashioned out of horn from some farmyard ox\
          to bring death to hungry fish. She met Thetis\
          sitting in a hollow cave with other sea gods\
          thronging there around her. In the middle of them all,\
          Thetis was lamenting the fate of her fine son,\
          who would die in fertile Troy, far from his home.\
          Standing right beside her, swift-footed Iris spoke:\
          \
          \'93Rouse yourself, Thetis. Zeus, whose thoughts\
[110] endure forever, is calling for you.\'94                                                    \
          \
          Silver-footed Thetis then said in reply:\
          \
          \'93Why is that mighty god now summoning me?                                         \
          I\'92m ashamed to associate with immortals,\
          my heart holds such immeasurable grief.\
          But I\'92ll go. And no matter what he says,\
          his words will not be wasted.\'94\
          \
          Saying this,\
          Thetis, queen of goddesses, took a dark veil,\
          the blackest of her garments, then set off on her way.\
          Swift Iris, with feet like wind, went on ahead.\
[120] The surging sea parted round the two of them.                                       \
          When they emerged on shore, they raced on up to heaven.\
          They found the wide-seeing son of Cronos in the midst\
          of all the other blessed gods, who live forever.\
          Once Athena had made room for her, Thetis sat                                                \
          with Father Zeus. Hera placed a gold cup in her hand,\
          with words of welcome. She drank, then handed back the cup.\
          The father of the gods and men spoke first:\
          \
          \'93You\'92ve come here to Olympus, goddess Thetis,\
          though you\'92re grieving, with endless sorrows\
[130] in your heart. I know that. But even so,                                           \
          I\'92ll tell you the reason why I\'92ve called you here.\
          For nine days immortals have been quarrelling\
          about Achilles, sacker of cities,\
          and Hector\'92s corpse. They keep urging Hermes,\
          keen-eyed killer of Argus, to steal the body.                                              \
          But I want to give honour to Achilles,          \
          maintain my respect for you in future,\
          and keep our friendship. So you must leave quickly.\
          Go to the army. Tell your son what I say.\
[140] Tell him the gods are annoyed at him,                                            \
          that of all immortals I\'92m especially angry,\
          because, in his heartfelt fury, he keeps\
          Hector at his beaked ships, won\'92t give him back.\
          Through fear of me, he may hand Hector over.\
          I\'92ll also send Iris to great-hearted Priam,\
          telling him to go to the Achaean ships,                                                       \
          to beg for his dear son, bearing presents\
          for Achilles to delight his heart.\'94\
          \
          Silver-footed Thetis did not disagree with Zeus. \
[150] She went speeding from Olympus\'92 peak to her son\'92s hut.                     \
          She found him there, still mourning endlessly.\
          Around him, his close companions were all busy,\
          in a hurry to get their morning meal prepared.\
          Inside the hut they\'92d butchered a large woolly sheep.\
          His noble mother sat close by him, caressed him\
          with her hand, then spoke to him, saying:\
          \
          \'93My son,\
          how long will you consume your heart with tears,\
          with this grieving, not thinking about food\
          or going to bed. To have sex with a woman                                                \
[160] would do you good. I won\'92t see you still alive                                \
          much longer\'97for at this moment, Death,\
          your powerful fate, is standing close at hand.\
          But quickly, listen to me. For I\'92m here\
          as messenger from Zeus. He told me this\'97\
          the gods are angry with you. Zeus himself\
          is the angriest of all immortals,\
          because, in your heartfelt fury, you keep\
          Hector by your beaked ships, won\'92t return him.\
          So come, now. Give him back, and for that corpse\
          accept a ransom.\'94\
          \
[170] Swift-footed Achilles                                                             \
          then replied to Thetis, saying:\
          \
          \'93So be it.\
          Whoever brings the ransom, let that man\
          have the corpse, if that\'92s what the Olympian\
          in his own heart truly desires.\'94                                                                     \
          \
          Thus, among the assembled ships, mother and son\
          spoke to each other many winged words.\
          \
          Meanwhile, Cronos\'92 son urged Iris to be off\
          to sacred Ilion:\
          \
          \'93You must go right away,\
          swift Iris. Leave your home here on Olympus.\
[180] Take this message to great-hearted Priam,                                    \
          inside Ilion\'97tell him he must visit\
          Achaean ships to ransom his dear son,\
          taking gifts to please Achilles\'92 heart.\
          He must go alone. No other Trojan man\
          is to accompany him. One herald,\
          an older man, can make the journey with him,\
          to drive the mules and sturdy wagon                                                           \
          and bring back to the city the body\
          of the godlike man Achilles killed.\
[190] He mustn\'92t think of death or be afraid.                                           \
          A fitting escort will accompany him\'97\
          Hermes, killer of Argus\'97as a guide,\
          until he brings him to Achilles.\
          Once he\'92s led him to Achilles\'92 hut,\
          that man will not kill him\'97he\'92ll restrain\
          all other men. For he\'92s not stupid,\
          blind, or disrespectful of the gods.\
          He\'92ll spare a suppliant, treat him kindly.\'94\
          \
          Zeus spoke. Storm-footed Iris rushed off with the message.\
[200] Reaching Priam\'92s house, she found him weeping there                                    \
          and mourning. His sons were sitting with their father\
          inside the courtyard, wetting garments with their tears.\
          The old man sat with them, cloak tightly wrapped around him.\
          Both his head and neck were covered with the dung\
          he\'92d grovelled in and grabbed up by the handful.\
          His daughters and sons\'92 wives were crying through the house,\
          thinking of many noble warriors who\'92d been killed\
          at Achaean hands. Zeus\'92 messenger approached.\
          Standing beside Priam, she spoke in a soft voice,\
[210] but nonetheless his limbs began to tremble.                                                      \
          \
          \'93Let your heart be brave, Priam, son of Dardanus.\
          Don\'92t be afraid. I\'92ve not come with news\
          of any harm to you, but to do good.\
          I am a messenger to you from Zeus\'97\
          he may be far off, but he looks out for you,\
          cares very much, and feels pity for you.\
          The Olympian is telling you to ransom\
          godlike Hector. Take presents to Achilles,\
          fine things his heart will find delightful.\
[220] You must go alone. No other Trojan man                                       \
          is to go along with you. A herald,\
          an older man, may make the journey with you,\
          to drive the mules and sturdy wagon\
          and bring back to the city the body                                                              \
          of the godlike man Achilles killed.\
          You mustn\'92t think of death or be afraid.\
          A proper escort will accompany you\'97\
          Hermes, killer of Argus\'97to guide you,\
          until he brings you to Achilles.\
[230] Once he\'92s led you to Achilles\'92 hut,                                                   \
          that man will not kill you\'97he\'92ll restrain\
          all other men. For he\'92s not stupid,\
          blind, or disrespectful of the gods.\
          He\'92ll spare a suppliant, treat him kindly.\'94\
          \
          With these words, swift-footed Iris went away.\
          Priam told his sons to prepare a sturdy mule cart                                              \
          and lash on a wicker box. Then he went in person\
          down to the sweet-smelling vaulted storage chamber\
          lined with cedar, which held many of his treasures.\
[240] He summoned Hecuba, his wife, then said:                                             \
          \
          \'93My lady,\
          a messenger has come to me from Zeus,\
          instructing me to ransom our dear son.\
          I\'92m to go to the Achaean ships, taking\
          gifts for Achilles to delight his heart.\
          So come, tell me what you feel about this.\
          My own heart and spirit are urging me,\
          in a strange and fearful way, to go there,\
          to the ships and wide Achaean camp.\'94\
          \
          At Priam\'92s words, his wife cried out. Then she replied:                                     \
          \
[250] \'93Where\'92s your mind gone, that wisdom you once had,                 \
          for which in earlier days you were well known\
          among your subjects and with strangers, too?\
          How can you want to visit the Achaean ships,\
          to go alone, before the eyes of the man\
          who\'92s killed so many of your noble sons?\
          You\'92ve an iron heart. If he captures you,\
          once he sees you, that man\'92s so savage,\
          so unreliable, he\'92ll show no pity.\
          He\'92ll not respect you. No, let\'92s mourn here,\
[260] in our home, sitting far away from Hector.                                     \
          That\'92s what mighty Fate spun out for him\
          when he was born, when I gave birth to him\'97                                          \
          that swift-running dogs would devour him\
          far from his parents beside that powerful man.\
          How I wish I could rip out that man\'92s heart,\
          then eat it. That would be some satisfaction\
          for my son, who wasn\'92t playing the coward\
          when he killed him. No, he was standing there,\
          defending deep-breasted Trojan women\
[270] and Trojan men, not thinking of his safety                                     \
          or running off in flight.\'94\
          \
          The old man,\
          godlike Priam, then said in response to Hecuba:\
          \
          \'93I want to go. Don\'92t try to stop me.\
          Don\'92t be a bird of ill omen in our house.\
          You won\'92t convince me. If some other man,                                               \
          some earthly mortal, had told me this,\
          a prophet who interprets sacrifices\
          or some priest, we\'92d think it false, reject it.\
          But this time I heard the goddess for myself.\
[280] I stared her in the face. So I will go.                                                 \
          Her message won\'92t be wasted. If I\'92m fated\
          to die by the bronze-clad Achaeans\'92 ships,\
          that\'92s what I wish. Let Achilles kill me,\
          once I\'92ve embraced my son and satisfied\
          my desire to mourn.\'94\
          \
          Priam finished speaking.\
          Then he threw open fine lids on the storage chests.\
          From there he took twelve lovely robes, twelve single cloaks,                        \
          as many blankets, white coverlets, and tunics.\
          He brought gold, weighing out a total of ten talents,\
[290] then two gleaming tripods, four cauldrons, and a cup,                          \
          a splendid one given to him by men of Thrace,\
          when he\'92d gone there as an envoy, a fine treasure.\
          Even this cup the old man didn\'92t leave at home\'97\
          he was so eager to pay ransom for his son.\
          Then Priam chased the Trojans from his courtyard,\
          shaming them with angry words:\
          \
          \'93Go away,\
          you wretches! You ought to be ashamed.\
          Have you nothing to cry about back home,                                                \
          so you come here tormenting me like this?\
[300] Isn\'92t it enough that Zeus, Cronos\'92 son,                                             \
          gives me this grief, that I must lose my son,\
          the best one of them all? Well, you\'92ll soon find out.\
          Now he\'92s been killed, it will be easier\
          for Achaeans to kill you, too.  As for me,\
          may I go down to Hades\'92 home, before I see\
          this city plundered and destroyed.\'94\
          \
          With these words, Priam went at the people with his staff,\
          lashing out. They moved off, beyond the old man\'92s rage.\
          Then he began shouting at his sons, cursing them\'97\
[310] Helenus, Paris, noble Agathon, Pammon,                                                           \
          Antiphonus, Polites, skilled in war shouts,\
          De\'efphobus, Hippothous, and proud Dios.\
          To these nine, the old man yelled his orders.\
          \
          \'93Hurry up, you useless children, my shame.\
          I wish you\'92d all been killed instead of Hector\
          by those swift ships\'97the entire bunch of you!\
          My life\'92s so miserable and empty.\
          I fathered sons, the best in spacious Troy.\
          I don\'92t think a single one of them is left\'97\
[320] not Mestor, or horseman Troilus, or Hector,                                 \
          that god among men. He didn\'92t seem to be\
          the child of any mortal man, but of a god.\
          Ares destroyed all those sons of mine.                                                        \
          The ones still left here are disgraceful\'97\
          liars, prancing masters of the dance floor,\
          who steal lambs and goats from their own people.\
          Will you not prepare a wagon for me\'97\
          and quickly? Put all those items in it,\
          so we can start out on our way.\'94\
          \
          Priam finished.\
[330] The sons, shaken by their father\'92s torrent of abuse,                               \
          brought out the sturdy, well-made wagon, a new one.\
          They lashed the wicker basket on it, then took down\
          from its peg a box-wood yoke to fit a team of mules,\
          furnished with guiding rings and with a knob on top.\
          They brought out with the yoke the lashing for it,                                             \
          a strap five metres long. They placed the yoke with care\
          across the polished pole at its front end, then set\
          the rope\'92s eye on the peg and bound it up securely\
          with three twists round the knob. They lashed it to the pole,\
[340] twisting the end below the hook. Next, they brought out                     \
          from the storeroom and stowed in the well-polished cart\
          the huge ransom to be paid for Hector\'92s head. The mules\
          they then put into harness, underneath the yoke,\
          strong-footed beasts, a splendid gift which Mysians\
          once gave Priam. Then to Priam\'92s chariot they yoked up\
          the team the old man kept for his own personal use,\
          taking care of them in his own gleaming stables.                                               \
          \
          While harnessing these animals went on this way\
          in the lofty courtyard for Priam and his herald,\
[350] two men with wisdom in their hearts, Hecuba approached.                 \
          She came up to them with her heart in great distress.\
          In her right hand she held out in a golden cup\
          some honey wine, so the men could pour libations\
          before setting out. Standing there beside their horses,\
          she addressed them, saying:\
          \
          \'93Take this wine.\
          Pour a libation out to Father Zeus,\
          and pray that you\'92ll come home again,\
          back from your enemies, since your heart\
          urges you against my will to those swift ships.\
[360] So pray to Cronos\'92 son, lord of dark clouds                                               \
          and god of Ida, who sees the land of Troy,\
          and ask him to send a bird of omen,\
          that fast messenger which is to him\
          the favourite of all birds, the mightiest.\
          Let that bird appear over to your right,\
          so, once you witness it with your own eyes,\
          you can have faith, as you go to the ships\
          of those fast-riding Argives. But should Zeus,\
          who sees far and wide, not send that messenger,\
[370] I\'92d not urge you or advise you go there,                                           \
          to Achaean ships, for all your eagerness.\'94\
          \
          Godlike Priam then said in reply to Hecuba:\
          \
          \'93Wife, I\'92ll not disregard what you advise.                                                    \
          It\'92s good to extend one\'92s hand to Zeus,\
          if he\'92s inclined to pity.\'94\
          \
          Priam spoke.\
          Then the old man ordered his servant woman\
          to pour pure water on his hands. She came out,\
          bringing with her a basin and a water jug.\
          Priam washed his hands. Taking the cup from his wife,\
[380] he prayed, standing in the middle of the courtyard.                               \
          Gazing up to heaven, he poured out some wine,\
          then spoke aloud, saying:\
          \
          \'93Father Zeus,\
          lord of Ida, most glorious and great,\
          grant that when I come to Achilles\'92 hut,\
          I\'92ll be welcomed kindly and with pity.\
          Send me a bird as omen, a swift messenger,                                               \
          the one that is your favourite, the strongest.\
          Let it appear to my right overhead,\
          so, once I witness it with my own eyes,\
[390] I can have faith as I go to those ships                                              \
          of the fast-riding Danaans.\'94\
          \
          So Priam prayed.\
          Counsellor Zeus heard him. At once he sent an eagle,\
          of all flying things the surest omen, a dark one,\
          which people call black eagle, with wings as wide\
          as doors on some rich man\'92s vaulted store house,\
          one fitted well with bolts\'97that\'92s how wide this eagle\
          spread its wings on either side, appearing on the right,\
          speeding across the city. When they saw that bird,                                            \
          they all rejoiced. Hearts in their chests felt great relief.\
[400] The old man, in a hurry, climbed in his chariot,                                      \
          then drove out through the gate and echoing courtyard.\
          In front the mules drew on the four-wheeled wagon,\
          led by wise Idaios. The horses came behind.\
          The old man kept laying on the whip, urging them\
          swiftly through the city. All his family followed him\
          in tears, as if Priam were going off to his death.\
          When they\'92d passed the gate and reached the plain,\
          his sons and sons-in-law turned back to Ilion.                                                    \
          But as those two men came out into the plain,\
[410] they did not go unobserved by wide-seeing Zeus.                                  \
          Looking down on that old man, Zeus pitied him.\
          At once he spoke to Hermes, his dear son:\
          \
          \'93Hermes, since your favourite task by far\
          is acting in a friendly way to men\
          and listening to any man you like,\
          go down there. Guide Priam to Achaeans,\
          to their hollow ships, so no one sees him,\
          so no Danaan even is aware of him,\
          until he comes to the son of Peleus.\'94\
          \
[420] Hermes the Guide, killer of Argus, hearing Zeus,                                   \
          did not disobey. At once he laced up on his feet                                                 \
          his lovely sandals, immortal golden shoes\
          which carry him across the seas and boundless earth\
          as fast as winds can blow. With him he took the rod\
          which puts to sleep the eyes of any man he wishes\
          or wakes up others who are slumbering.\
          With this rod in hand, mighty Hermes flew away.\
          He quickly came to Troy and to the Hellespont.\
          There he walked on in the form of a young prince\
[430] with his first hair on his lip, looking that age                                          \
          when charms of youth are at their loveliest.\
          \
          When the two men had passed the burial mound of Ilus,\
          they reined in the mules and horses, stopping there                                          \
          beside the river for a drink. For by this time\
          darkness had come down over the earth. Looking round,\
          the herald saw Hermes approaching. He said to Priam:\
          \
          \'93Be careful, son of Dardanus. At this point,\
          we need to think with prudence. I see a man,\
          and it seems we may be cut to pieces soon.\
[440] Come, let\'92s go in your chariot, or at least                                        \
          clasp him by the knees and beg for mercy.\
          He may feel pity for us.\'94\
          \
          Idaios spoke.\
          The old man\'92s mind was very troubled.\
          He was dreadfully afraid. On his bent limbs,\
          the hairs stood out, and he stayed there in a daze.                                             \
          But Hermes the Helper came up by himself,\
          took the old man\'92s hand, then asked him questions:\
          \
          \'93Father, where are you going with these horses\
          and these mules through this immortal night,\
[450] when other living men are fast asleep?                                           \
          Aren\'92t you afraid of those Achaeans,\
          hostile, fury-breathing, ruthless soldiers\'97\
          they\'92re not far off. If one of them should see you\
          bearing all this treasure in the swift black night,\
          what would you do then? You\'92re not that young.\
          Your escort here is elderly, too old\
          to defend himself against someone\
          who wants to start a fight. But as for me,                                                   \
          I\'92ll not harm you. In fact, I will protect you\
[460] from other men, because in you I see                                              \
          my own dear father.\'94\
          \
          Old godlike Priam\
          then said to Hermes in reply:\
          \
          \'93My dear child,\
          Things are indeed just as you say. But some god\
          holds his hand over me, to send me here\
          a traveller like you who comes to meet us,\
          an auspicious sign, with your handsome shape\
          and your fine common sense. Those parents of yours\
          who gave birth to you are surely fortunate.\'94\
          \
          Messenger Hermes, killer of Argus, then said:\
          \
[470] \'93Old man, what you say is very true.                                               \
          But come now, tell me\'97and tell me truly\'97                                              \
          are you sending so much treasure out\
          for foreign people to keep safe for you,\
          or are you leaving sacred Ilion\
          in fear, now that the finest man\'92s been killed,\
          your own son, who never was reluctant\
          in any battles with Achaeans.\'94\
          \
          Old godlike Priam spoke again to Hermes:\
          \
          \'93Who are you, good sir? Who are your parents?\
[480] You speak so fairly of my doomed son\'92s fate.\'94                               \
          \
          Hermes the Guide, killer of Argus, then replied:\
          \
          \'93You want to test me, old man, by asking me\
          of godlike Hector. My eyes have seen him                                                 \
          many times in fights where men win glory.\
          And when he drove the Argives to their ships,\
          killing and butchering them with his sharp bronze,\
          we stood there astonished. For Achilles,\
          still in a furious rage with Agamemnon,\
          would not let us fight. I attend on him.\
[490] The same ship brought us here. I\'92m a soldier,                                \
          one of the Myrmidons. My father\'92s Polyctor,\
          a man of substance, about as old as you.\
          He has six other sons\'97I\'92m the seventh.\
          By casting lots with them I was selected                                                     \
          to sail here. I\'92ve come now from our ships\
          here to the plain. At dawn bright-eyed Achaeans\
          will organize for battle round the city.\
          They\'92re restless, just sitting idly there.\
          And it\'92s impossible for Achaea\'92s kings\
[500] to keep in check their eagerness for war.\'94                                       \
          \
          Old godlike Priam then said to Hermes:\
          \
          \'93If you, indeed, do serve with Achilles,\
          son of Peleus, then tell me the whole truth\'97\
          is my son still beside the ships, or has Achilles\
          already carved his body limb from limb\
          and thrown him to the dogs to eat?\'94\
          \
          Hermes the Guide, killer of Argus, answered:                                                     \
          \
          \'93Old man, birds and dogs have not yet fed on him.\
          He\'92s lying still beside Achilles\'92 ship,\
[510] among the huts, the same as when he died.                                   \
          For twelve days he\'92s lain there, but his flesh\
          has not decayed. Worms are not eating him,\
          as they do with men who die in battle.\
          Each dawn, Achilles drags him ruthlessly\
          around his dear companion\'92s burial mound,\
          but that does not lacerate the corpse.\
          It would amaze you, if you went in person,\
          to see how he lies there as fresh as dew,\
          with all blood washed away, no stain on him.\
[520] All the wounds he got have closed completely,                                        \
          and many people stuck their bronze in him.\
          But that\'92s how blessed gods care for your son,\
          though he\'92s a corpse. For their hearts loved him.\'94\
          \
          At these words, the old man felt joy. He replied:\
          \
          \'93My son, it\'92s good to pay immortal gods\
          what\'92s due to them. It\'92s certainly the case,\
          as true as that my son was once alive,\
          he never once neglected in our home\
          the gods who hold Olympus. That\'92s the reason\
[530] they now remember him for what he did,                                       \
          even his dead body after death. Come now,\
          take this lovely goblet as my gift to you.\
          Protect me. Be my guide with the gods\'92 help,                                             \
          until I reach the hut of Peleus\'92 son.\'94\
          \
          Messenger Hermes, killer of Argus, answered Priam:\
          \
          \'93You\'92re testing me, old man, because I\'92m younger.\
          You won\'92t convince me when you ask me\
          to take your gift without Achilles\'92 knowledge.\
          My heart fears that man, but I respect him\
[540] too much to rob him, in case something bad                                 \
          comes to me later. But I\'92ll be your guide\'97\
          even all the way to famous Argos\'97\
          attending to your every need on a swift ship\
          or else on foot. No man will fight against you\
          because he\'92s thinks too little of your guide.\'94\
          \
          With these words, Hermes jumped up in the chariot                                         \
          behind the horses, quickly grabbing reins and whip.\
          He breathed great strength into those mules and horses.\
          \
          When they reached the ditch and towers round the ships,\
[550] the sentries there were starting to prepare their meal.                          \
          Hermes, killer of Argus, poured sleep on all of them,\
          then opened up the gates at once, pulling back the bars.\
          He led in Priam with the wagon load of priceless gifts.\
          They then reached the lofty hut of Peleus\'92 son,\
          which Myrmidons had built there for their king, cutting\
          pine beams for it, then roofing it with downy reeds                                           \
          gathered from the meadows. They\'92d built around it\
          a large courtyard for their king, strongly fenced with stakes.\
          A single beam of pine kept the gate securely closed.\
[560] It needed three Achaeans to push it into place,                                      \
          and three to draw that great bolt from the door,\
          three of the rest of the Achaeans, for Achilles\
          could push it into place alone. Helper Hermes\
          opened the gate himself for old man Priam,\
          then brought in those splendid gifts for swift Achilles.\
          He climbed down from the chariot and said:\
          \
          \'93Old man,\
          I am Hermes, an immortal god. I\'92ve come,                                                 \
          because my father sent me as your guide.\
          But I\'92ll go back now. I won\'92t approach\
[570] within sight of Achilles. There\'92d be anger                                       \
          if an immortal god greeted mortal men\
          face to face. But you should go inside,\
          appeal to him in his father\'92s name,\
          his mother with her lovely hair, his child,\
          so you may stir his heart.\'94\
          \
          With these words,\
          Hermes went on his way, back to high Olympus.\
          Priam then climbed from his chariot to the ground.\
          He left Idaios there to tend the mules and horses.                                             \
          The old man went directly in the hut\
[580] where Achilles, dear to Zeus, usually sat.                                                 \
          He found Achilles there, with only two companions,\
          sitting some distance from him\'97warrior Automedon\
          and Alcimus, offshoot of the war god Ares\'97\
          busy attending him. He\'92d just completed dinner.\
          He\'92d had food and drink, but the table was still there.\
          The men did not see great Priam as he entered.\
          He came up to Achilles, then with his fingers\
          clasped his knees and kissed his hands, those dreadful hands,\
          man-killers, which had slain so many of his sons.\
[590] Just as sheer folly grips a man who in his own land                                         \
          kills someone, then runs off to a land of strangers,\
          to the home of some rich man, so those who see him\
          are seized with wonder\'97that\'92s how Achilles then\
          looked on godlike Priam in astonishment.\
          The others were amazed. They gazed at one another.\
          Then Priam made his plea, entreating:\
          \
          \'93Godlike Achilles,\
          remember your own father, who\'92s as old as me,\
          on the painful threshold of old age.\
          It may well be that those who live around him\
[600] are harassing him, and no one\'92s there                                              \
          to save him from ruin and destruction.\
          But when he hears you\'92re still alive,                                                            \
          his heart feels joy, for every day he hopes\
          he\'92ll see his dear son come back home from Troy.\
          But I\'92m completely doomed to misery,\
          for I fathered the best sons in spacious Troy,\
          yet I say now not one of them remains.\
          I had fifty when Achaea\'92s sons arrived\'97\
          nineteen born from the same mother\'92s womb,\
[610] others the women of the palace bore me.                                       \
          Angry Ares drained the life of most of them.\
          But I had one left, guardian of our city,\
          protector of its people. You\'92ve just killed him,\
          as he was fighting for his native country.                                                    \
          I mean Hector. For his sake I\'92ve come here,\
          to Achaea\'92s ships, to win him back from you.\
          And I\'92ve brought a ransom beyond counting.\
          So Achilles, show deference to the gods\
          and pity for myself, remembering\
[620] your own father. Of the two old men,                                              \
          I\'92m more pitiful, because I have endured\
          what no living mortal on this earth has borne\'97\
          I\'92ve lifted up to my own lips and kissed\
          the hands of the man who killed my son.\'94\
          \
          Priam finished. His words roused in Achilles\
          a desire to weep for his own father. Taking Priam\'92s hand,\
          he gently moved him back. So the two men there\
          both remembered warriors who\'92d been slaughtered.\
          Priam, lying at Achilles\'92 feet, wept aloud                                                             \
[630] for man-killing Hector, and Achilles also wept                                       \
          for his own father and once more for Patroclus.\
          The sound of their lamenting filled the house.\
          \
          When godlike Achilles had had enough of weeping,\
          when the need to mourn had left his heart and limbs,\
          he stood up quickly from his seat, then with his hand\
          helped the old man to his feet, feeling pity\
          for that grey head and beard. Then Achilles spoke\'97\
          his words had wings:\
          \
          \'93You unhappy man,\
          your heart\'92s had to endure so many evils.\
[640] How could you dare come to Achaea\'92s ships,                                 \
          and come alone, to rest your eyes on me,                                                   \
          when I\'92ve killed so many noble sons of yours?\
          You must have a heart of iron. But come now,\
          sit on this chair. Though we\'92re both feeling pain,\
          we\'92ll let our grief lie quiet on our hearts.\
          For there\'92s no benefit in frigid tears.\
          That\'92s the way the gods have spun the threads\
          for wretched mortal men, so they live in pain,\
          though gods themselves live on without a care.\
[650] On Zeus\'92 floor stand two jars which hold his gifts\'97                     \
          one has disastrous things, the other blessings.\
          When thunder-loving Zeus hands out a mixture,\
          that man will, at some point, meet with evil,                                            \
          then, some other time, with good. When Zeus\'92 gift\
          comes only from the jar containing evil,\
          he makes the man despised. A wicked frenzy\
          drives him all over sacred earth\'97he wanders\
          without honour from the gods or mortal men.\
          Consider Peleus. The gods gave him gifts,\
[660] splendid presents, right from birth. In wealth,                               \
          in his possessions, he surpassed all men.\
          And he was king over the Myrmidons.\
          Though he was a mortal, the gods gave him\
          a goddess for a wife. But even to him\
          the gods gave evil, too, for in his palace\
          there sprang up no line of princely children.\
          He had one son, doomed to an early death.                                               \
          I\'92ll not look after him as he grows old,\
          since I\'92m a long way from my native land,\
[670] sitting here in Troy, bringing pain to you                                       \
          and to your children. Think of yourself, old man.\
          We hear that you were fortunate in former times.\
          In all the lands from Lesbos to the south,\
          where Macar ruled, and east to Phrygia,\
          to the boundless Hellespont, in all these lands,\
          old man, they say that you surpassed all men\
          for wealth and children. But from the time\
          you got disaster from the heavenly gods,\
          man-killing battles round your city\
[680] have never ceased. You must endure it all,                                     \
          without a constant weeping in your heart.\
          You achieve nothing by grieving for your son.                                           \
          You won\'92t bring him to life again, not before\
          you\'92ll have to suffer yet another evil.\'94\
          \
          Old godlike Priam then answered Achilles:\
          \
          \'93Don\'92t make me sit down on a chair, my lord,\
          while Hector lies uncared for in your huts.\
          But quickly give him back, so my own eyes\
          can see him. And take the enormous ransom\
[690] we\'92ve brought here for you. May it give you joy.                            \
          And may you get back to your native land,\
          since you\'92ve now let me live to see the sunlight.\'94\
          \
          With an angry look, swift-footed Achilles snapped at Priam:\
          \
          \'93Old man, don\'92t provoke me. I myself intend                                             \
          to give you Hector. Zeus sent me here\
          a messenger, the mother who bore me,\
          a daughter of the Old Man of the Sea.\
          And in my heart, Priam, I recognize\'97\
          it\'92s no secret to me\'97that some god\
[700] led you here to the swift Achaean ships.                                         \
          No matter how young and strong, no living man\
          would dare to make the trip to our encampment.\
          He could not evade the sentries or push back\
          our door bolts\'97that would not be easy.\
          So don\'92t agitate my grieving heart still more,\
          or I might not spare even you, old man,\
          though you\'92re a suppliant here in my hut.                                                  \
          I could transgress what Zeus has ordered.\'94\
          \
          Achilles spoke. The old man, afraid, obeyed him.\
[710] Then Peleus\'92 son sprang to the door, like a lion.                                     \
          Not alone\'97his two attendants went out with him,\
          warrior Automedon and Alcimus, whom he honoured\
          the most of his companions after dead Patroclus.\
          They freed the mules and horses from their harnesses,\
          led in the herald, the old man\'92s crier, sat him on a stool.\
          Then from the polished wagon they brought in\
          that priceless ransom for Hector\'92s head, leaving there\
          two cloaks and a thickly woven tunic, so Achilles                                              \
          could wrap up the corpse before he gave it back\
[720] for Priam to take home. Achilles then called out,                                   \
          ordering his servant women to wash the body,\
          and then anoint it, after moving it away,\
          so Priam wouldn\'92t see his son, then, heart-stricken,\
          be unable to contain his anger at the sight.\
          Achilles\'92 own spirit might then get so aroused\
          he could kill Priam, disobeying Zeus\'92 orders.\
          Servants washed the corpse, anointed it with oil,\
          and put a lovely cloak and tunic round it.\
          Achilles himself lifted it and placed it on a bier.\
[730] Then together he and his companions set it                                                       \
          on the polished wagon. Achilles, with a groan,\
          called to his dear companion:\
          \
          \'93O Patroclus,\
          don\'92t be angry with me, if you learn,\
          even in Hades\'92 house, that I gave back\
          godlike Hector to his dear father.\
          He\'92s brought to me a fitting ransom.\
          I\'92ll be giving you your full share of it,\
          as is appropriate.\'94\
          \
          Godlike Achilles spoke,\
          then went back once more into the hut and sat\
[740] on the richly decorated chair he\'92d left                                                       \
          by the opposite wall. Then he spoke to Priam:\
          \
          \'93Old man, your son has been given back,\
          as you requested. He\'92s lying on a bier.                                                        \
          You\'92ll see him for yourself at day break,\
          when you take him. We should think of eating.\
          Even fair-haired Niobe remembered food,\
          with twelve of her own children murdered in her home,\
          her six young daughters and her six strong sons.\
          Apollo was so enraged at Niobe,\
[750] with his silver bow he killed the sons. The daughters                  \
          Artemis the Archer slaughtered, for Niobe\
          had compared herself to lovely Leto,\
          saying the goddess only had two children,\
          while she had given birth to many. Even so,\
          though only two, those gods killed all her children.\
          For nine days they lay in their own blood\'97                                               \
          there was no one there to give them burial.\
          Cronos\'92 son had turned the people all to stone.\
          The tenth day, the gods in heaven buried them.\
[760] That\'92s when, worn out with weeping, Niobe                                  \
          had thoughts of food. And now, somewhere in the rocks\
          in Sipylus, among the lonely mountains,\
          where, men say, goddess nymphs lie down to sleep,\
          the ones that dance beside the Achelous,\
          there Niobe, though turned to stone, still broods,\
          thinking of the pain the gods have given her.\
          But come, royal old man, let\'92s think of food.\
          Later you can lament for your dear son,\
          when you have taken him to Ilion,                                                               \
[770] where you\'92ll shed many tears for him.\'94                                           \
          \
          Swift Achilles finished. Then, jumping up, he killed\
          a white-fleeced sheep. His companions skinned it,\
          then prepared the meat, slicing it skilfully\
          and putting it on spits. They cooked it carefully,\
          then pulled spits from the pieces. Taking bread,\
          Automedon set it in fine baskets on the table.\
          Achilles served the meat. Then their hands went to it,\
          taking the food prepared and set beside them.\
          When they\'92d satisfied their need for food and drink,\
[780] then Priam, son of Dardanus, looked at Achilles,                                   \
          wondering at his size and beauty, like gazing                                                     \
          face to face upon a god. Achilles looked at Priam,\
          marvelling at his royal appearance and the words he heard.\
          Once they\'92d had their fill of looking at each other,\
          the first to speak was the old man, godlike Priam:\
          \
          \'93My lord, show me my bed now with all speed,\
          so we may lie down and enjoy sweet sleep.\
          For since your hands took my son\'92s life away,\
          my eyelids have not closed my eyes, not once.\
[790] I always weep, brooding on my sorrows,                                         \
          my endless grief. I grovel in the dung                                                          \
          inside my closed-in courtyard. Now I\'92ve eaten,\
          tasted meat, and let myself drink gleaming wine.\
          Before this, I\'92d eat nothing.\'94\
          \
          Priam spoke.\
          Achilles told his comrades and the servants\
          to set beds out on his portico, laying on them\
          fine purple rugs with blankets spread on top,\
          placing above them wool-lined cloaks for clothing.\
          Women slaves went from the hall with torches.\
[800] Right away they spread out two beds, working quickly.                        \
          Then swift-footed Achilles spoke to Priam,\
          in a joking tone:\
          \
          \'93Sleep here outside, my dear old man,                                         \
          in case some Achaean counsellor arrives.\
          They always come to see me to make plans,\
          as is our custom. If one of them saw you\
          on this pitch black night, he might run off\
          to tell Agamemnon, his people\'92s shepherd.\
          Then giving back the corpse might be delayed.\
          But come, tell me\'97and speak truthfully\'97\
[810] how many days do you require to bury                                           \
          godlike Hector, so I can stop that long\
          and keep the troops in check?\'94\
          \
          Old godlike Priam\
          then said in answer to Achilles:\
          \
          \'93If you\'92re willing                                                      \
          for me to give lord Hector a full burial,\
          then, Achilles, as a personal favour,\
          there is something you could do for me.\
          You know how we\'92re restricted to our city.\
          It\'92s a long way to the mountains to get wood.\
          Besides, the Trojans are especially fearful.\
[820] We\'92ll mourn Hector for nine days in our home.                             \
          On the tenth day we\'92ll have his funeral.\
          Then there\'92ll be a banquet for the people.\
          On the eleventh, we\'92ll make his burial mound.\
          The twelfth day, if we must, we\'92ll go to war.\'94\
          \
          Swift-footed Achilles then said to Priam:\
          \
          \'93All right, old Priam, things will be arranged\
          as you request. I\'92ll suspend the fighting                                                      \
          for the length of time you\'92ve asked for.\'94\
          \
          As he said this, Achilles took the old man\'92s wrist\
[830] on his right hand, in case his heart was fearful.                                       \
          So by that house on the porch they lay down to sleep,\
          Priam and his herald, both men of wisdom.\
          Achilles slept in a corner of his well-built hut,\
          with lovely Briseis stretched out there beside him.\
          \
          Meanwhile, other gods and warrior charioteers,\
          all conquered by sweet sleep, slept the whole night through.\
          But slumber did not grip the Helper Hermes,\
          as he considered in his heart what he might do\
          to guide king Priam from the ships in secret,                                                      \
[840] without the strong guard at the gate observing.                                     \
          So standing above Priam\'92s head, he said to him:\
          \
          \'93Old man, you\'92re not expecting any harm,\
          as you sleep like this among your enemies,\
          since Achilles spared your life. Your dear son\
          is ransomed for that huge amount you paid.\
          But if Agamemnon, son of Atreus,\
          or all Achaeans learn that you are here,\
          those sons you\'92ve left behind will have to pay\
          a ransom three times greater for your life.\'94\
          \
[850] Hermes spoke. At his words, the old man grew afraid.                          \
          He woke up the herald. Hermes harnessed mules and horses,                         \
          then guided them himself quickly through the camp,\
          attracting no attention. But when they reached the ford\
          across the swirling river Xanthus, immortal Zeus\'92 child,\
          Hermes left them and returned to high Olympus.\
          \
          As Dawn spread her yellow robes over all the earth,\
          the two men drove their horses inside the city,\
          weeping and groaning. The mules pulled in the corpse.\
          No one noticed them, no man, no well-dressed woman,\
[860] except Cassandra, a girl as beautiful                                                         \
          as golden Aphrodite. She\'92d climbed up Pergamus.                                             \
          She saw her father standing in his chariot,\
          together with his herald, the town crier.\
          In the mule cart she saw the corpse lying on the bier.\
          With a scream, Cassandra cried out to all the city:\
          \
          \'93See, men and women of Troy, come and see\'97\
          look on Hector, if, while he was still alive,\
          you would rejoice when he came back from war,\
          for he was a great joy to all our city\
          and its people.\'94\
          \
[870] At Cassandra\'92s shout,                                                          \
          no man or woman was left unaffected.\
          There in the city all were overcome with grief\
          beyond anyone\'92s control. Close to the gates,\
          they met Priam bringing home the body.\
          First Hector\'92s dear wife and his noble mother,                                                   \
          tearing their hair, ran to the sturdy wagon,\
          trying to touch Hector\'92s head. People crowded round,\
          all weeping. They would have stayed there by the gates,\
          shedding tears for Hector the entire day\
[880] until the sun went down, but from the chariot                                        \
          the old man cried out to the crowd:\
          \
          \'93Make way there\'97\
          let the mules get through. There\'92ll be time enough,\
          once I\'92ve got him home, for everyone to weep.\'94\
          \
          At Priam\'92s words, the crowd moved back, making room.\
          The wagon pushed on through. Once they\'92d got him home,\
          inside their great house, they laid him on a corded bed,                                   \
          then placed singers there beside him, to lead their songs.\
          They sang a mournful funeral dirge. Then the women\
          began their wailing, led by white-armed Andromache,\
[890] who held in her arms the head of man-killing Hector.                          \
          \
          \'93My husband\'97you\'92ve lost your life so young,\
          leaving me a widow in our home,\
          with our son still an infant, the child\
          born to you and me in our wretchedness.\
          I don\'92t think he\'92ll grow up to adulthood.\
          Before that, our city will all be destroyed.\
          For you, who kept watch over for us, are dead.\
          You used to protect our city, keeping\
          its noble wives and little children safe.                                                       \
[900] Now, soon enough, they\'92ll all be carried off                                    \
          in hollow ships. I\'92ll be there among them.\
          And you, my child, you\'92ll follow with me,\
          to some place where you\'92ll be put to work\
          at menial tasks, slaving for a cruel master.\
          Or else some Achaean man will grab your arm\
          and throw you from the wall\'97a dreadful death\'97\
          in his anger that Hector killed his brother,\
          or his father, or his son. For Hector\'92s hands\
          made great numbers of Achaeans sink their teeth\
[910] into the broad earth. In wretched warfare,                                      \
          your father was not gentle. So in our city                                                    \
          they now weep for him. O Hector, what sorrow,\
          what untold grief you\'92ve laid upon your parents.\
          What painful sorrows will remain for me,\
          especially for me. As you were dying,\
          you didn\'92t reach your hand out from the bed,\
          or give me some final words of wisdom,\
          something I could remember always,\
          night and day, as I continue my lament.\'94\
          \
[920] Andromache said this in tears. The women all wailed with her.          \
          Then Hecuba took her turn in leading their laments:\
          \
          \'93Hector, dearest by far of all my children,\
          loved by the gods, as well, when you were living.\
          Now, at your death, they still take care of you.                                          \
          When swift Achilles took my other sons,\
          he\'92d ship them off across the boundless seas,\
          to Samos, or Imbros, or foggy Lemnos.\
          When his long-edged bronze took away your life,\
          he dragged you many times around the mound\
[930] for his comrade Patroclus, whom you killed.                                 \
          Yet even so, he could not revive him.\
          Now you lie here in our house, fresh as dew,\
          like someone whom Apollo of the silver bow\
          has just come to and killed with gentle arrows.\'94\
          \
          As she spoke, Hecuba wept. She stirred them on                                               \
          to endless lamentation. Helen was the third\
          to lead those women in their wailing:\
          \
          \'93Hector\'97of all my husband\'92s brothers,\
          you\'92re by far the dearest to my heart.\
[940] My husband is godlike Alexander,                                                   \
          who brought me here to Troy. I wish I\'92d died\
          before that happened! This is the twentieth year\
          since I went away and left my native land,\
          but I\'92ve never heard a nasty word from you\
          or an abusive speech. In fact, if anyone\
          ever spoke rudely to me in the house\'97\
          one of your brothers or sisters, some brother\'92s\
          well-dressed wife, or your mother\'97for your father                                  \
          always was so kind, as if he were my own\'97\
[950] you\'92d speak out, persuading them to stop,                                     \
          using your gentleness, your soothing words.\
          Now I weep for you and for my wretched self,\
          so sick at heart, for there\'92s no one else\
          in spacious Troy who\'92s kind to me and friendly.\
          They all look at me and shudder with disgust.\'94\
          \
          Helen spoke in tears. The huge crowd joined in their lament.\
          Then old Priam addressed his people:\
          \
          \'93You Trojans,\
          you must fetch some wood here to the city.\
          Don\'92t let your hearts fear any ambush,\
[960] some crafty Achaean trick. For Achilles,                                         \
          when he sent me back from the hollow ships,                                           \
          gave me his word they\'92d not harm us\
          until the twelfth day dawns.\'94\
          \
          Priam finished.\
          The people hitched up mules and oxen to their wagons\
          and then gathered before the city with all speed.\
          For nine days they brought in wood, an immense amount.\
          When the tenth dawn came, they brought brave Hector out,\
          then, all in tears, laid his corpse on top the funeral pyre.\
          They set it alight. When rose-fingered Dawn came up,\
[970] they gathered around that pyre of glorious Hector.                               \
          Once they\'92d all assembled there together,                                                           \
          first they doused the pyre with gleaming wine, every part\
          that fire\'92s strength had touched. His brothers and comrades\
          collected Hector\'92s ash-white bones, as they mourned him\'97\
          heavy tears running down their cheeks\'97and placed them\
          in a golden urn, wrapped in soft purple cloth.\
          They quickly set the urn down in a shallow grave,\
          covered it with large stones set close together,\
          then hurried to pile up the mound, posting sentries\
[980] on every side, in case well-armed Achaeans                                            \
          attacked too soon. Once they\'92d piled up the mound,\
          they went back in, gathered together for a splendid feast,\
          all in due order, in Priam\'92s house, king raised by Zeus.\
          And thus they buried Hector, tamer of horses.}