{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf460
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue0;}
\deftab720
\pard\tx0\pardeftab720\ri1920\sl440\sa266

\f0\fs28 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Book Five\uc0\u8232 \'a0Diomedes Goes to Battle\
\'a0 \'97[Athena inspires Diomedes with special powers; Athena takes Ares from the battle; Achaean leaders kill many Trojans; Diomedes' special glory on the field; Pandarus hits Diomedes with an arrow; Athena restores Diomedes, who continues his battle frenzy; Aeneas and Pandarus move out against Diomedes; Diomedeskills Pandarus, wounds Aeneas; Aphrodite saves Aeneas; Sthenelus captures Aeneas' horses; Diomedes attacks and wounds Aphrodite, who returns to Olympus;Diomedes threatens Apollo; Apollo heals Aeneas; Sarpedon complains to Hector; the battle continues; Sarpedon kills Tlepolemus, but is wounded; Athena and Hera go down to the battlefield; Athena and Diomedes attack and wound Ares; Ares returns to Olympus]\
Then Pallas Athena gave Diomedes, son of Tydeus,\uc0\u8232 strength and courage, so among all Argives,\u8232 he\'92d stand out and win heroic glory.\u8232 She made his helmet blaze with tireless flames,\u8232 his shield as well\'97like a late star in summer\u8232 which shines especially bright, newly risen from its bath\u8232 in Ocean\'92s streams. Around his head and shoulders\u8232 the goddess put a fiery glow, then drove him forward,\u8232 right into the middle of the strife, the killing zone,\u8232 where most warriors fight.Among the Trojans\u8232 was a rich and honourable man called Dares,\u8232 priest of Hephaestus. He had two sons\'97Phegeus  \'97[10]\u8232 and Idaios\'97both very skilled in all aspects of war.\u8232 Moving forward in their chariot to the front,\u8232 these two charged Diomedes, who was on foot,\u8232 staying on the ground. When they were at close range,\u8232 Phegeus was the first to hurl his long-shadowed spear.\u8232 The spear point flew by Diomedes\'92 left shoulder\'97\u8232 it missed him. Tydeus\'92 son then threw his spear.\u8232 The weapon did not leave his hand and miss the target.\u8232 It hit Phegeus right between the nipples\u8232 and knocked him from his splendid chariot.\u8232 Idaios jumped out and ran off from his horses. \'97[20]\u8232 He didn\'92t dare protect his slaughtered brother\'92s corpse.\u8232 Even so, he wouldn\'92t have escaped black doom,\u8232 but Hephaestus saved him with a dark cloud cover,\u8232 so his aged father wouldn\'92t waste away with grief.\u8232 Tydeus\'92 son, great Diomedes, drove the horses off,\u8232 then gave them to his comrades to take back to the ships.\u8232 When great-hearted Trojans saw those two sons of Dares\'97one shunning battle, one dead beside his chariot\'97\u8232 all their hearts were stirred.\'a0\'a0Then Athena, eyes glittering,\u8232 took her brother, headstrong Ares, by the hand,  \'97[30]\u8232 and said to him:\
\'93Ares, Ares, insatiable man-killer,\uc0\u8232 destroyer of cities, why don\'92t we leave\u8232 Trojans and Achaeans to fight it out?\u8232 Father Zeus will make one group victorious.\u8232 Let\'92s withdraw, avoiding Zeus\'92 anger.\'94\
With these words, she led headstrong Ares from the battle,\uc0\u8232 then sat him down by Scamander river bank.Danaans then began to push the Trojans back.\u8232 Each leader killed his enemy. First, Agamemnon,\u8232 king of men, threw huge Odius, chief of the Halizoni,\u8232 from his chariot. His spear first struck him in the back,  \'97[40]\u8232 between the shoulder blades, as he turned to flee.\u8232 It drove clean through his chest. Odius pitched forward\u8232 with a thud, his armour rattling round him as he fell.\u8232 Idomeneus slaughtered Phaestus, son of Borus,\u8232 a Meonian, who\'92d come from fertile Tarne.\u8232 With his long spear, skilful Idomeneus struck him\u8232 in his right shoulder, as he climbed in his chariot.\u8232 Dreadful darkness came and gathered Phaestus in.\u8232 Those attending Idomeneus stripped the armour.\u8232 Then with his sharp spear Menelaus, son of Atreus,\u8232 killed Scamandrius, son of Strophius, a huntsman.  \'97[50]\u8232 Artemis herself had taught him how to shoot\u8232 every animal raised in the mountain forests.\u8232 But archer Artemis was no help to him then,\u8232 no more than was his expertise in archery,\u8232 at which he\'92d been pre-eminent in former times.\'a0\u8232 For fine spearman Menelaus, son of Atreus,\u8232 caught him as he ran away in front of him,\u8232 hitting him in the back between his shoulder blades,\u8232 forcing the spear right through Scamandrius\'92 chest.\u8232 He fell head first. His armour rattled round him.\
Meriones then killed Phereclus, son of Tecton,\uc0\u8232 Harmon\'92s son, whose hands could make fine objects of all sorts. \'97[60]\u8232 Pallas Athena had a special love for him.\u8232 He was the one who\'92d made well-balanced ships\u8232 for Paris at the start of all the trouble,\'a0\u8232 bringing disaster on the Trojans and on Paris, too,\u8232 for he was ignorant of what gods had decreed.\u8232 Meriones went after Phereclus as he ran off,\u8232 hurled his spear straight into his right buttock.\u8232 The spear point pushed on through, below the bone,\u8232 piercing his bladder. He fell down on his knees,\u8232 screaming. Then death carried him into its shadows.\
Then Meges killed Pedaeus, Antenor\'92s bastard son.\uc0\u8232 Theano had raised him with all care, loving him \'97[70]\u8232 as one of her own children, to please her husband.That famous spearman Meges, son of Phyleus,\u8232 coming up close, drove a sharp spear in his neck,\u8232 into the nape behind his head. The bronze point,\u8232 slicing under his tongue, smashed through his teeth.\u8232 He fell into the dust, jaws locked on the cold bronze.\
Eurypylus, Euaemon\'92s son, killed lord Hypsenor,\uc0\u8232 son of proud Dolopion, Scamander\'92s priest,\u8232 a man honoured by his people as a god.\u8232 Eurypylus, Euaemon\'92s splendid son, caught him\u8232 as he ran off in front of him. Going quickly after him, \'97[80]\u8232 Eurypylus struck at Hypsenor\'92s shoulder\'97\u8232 his sharp sword sliced off Hypsenor\'92s brawny arm.\u8232 The bloody limb fell on the ground. Then death\'92s black night,\u8232 all-powerful fate, moved in and stole away his sight.\
Thus these men kept toiling in the battle frenzy.\uc0\u8232 As for Diomedes, you couldn\'92t tell where he belonged,\u8232 whether among the Trojans or Achaeans.\u8232 For he rushed across the plain like a swollen river,\u8232 like a swift winter torrent bursting dikes\'97\u8232 no dam put in its wway can hold it back,no barrier of fruitful vineyards check its current,  \'97[90]\u8232 as all at once it floods when storms from Zeus roar down.\u8232 It knocks aside all fine things built by farmers,\u8232 hard-working men. That\'92s how the son of Tydeus\u8232 drove the dense ranks of Trojans into mass confusion.\u8232 For all their numbers they could not contain him.\
Lycaon\'92s fine son saw Diomedes moving fast\uc0\u8232 along the plain, pushing Trojan ranks in front of him,\u8232 in complete disorder. He quickly bent his bow,\u8232 taking aim at Diomedes. He shot an arrow\u8232 and hit him on his sculpted body armour, \u8232 in the right shoulder. The sharp arrow went in there,\u8232 kept going, and splattered blood down on the curving metal.\'a0  \'97[100]\u8232 At this Lycaon\'92s noble son gave out a noisy shout:\
\'93Come on, you brave horse-lashing Trojans.\uc0\u8232 For the finest of Achaeans has been hurt.\u8232 I don\'92t think he\'92ll long survive my arrow\'92s force,\u8232 if Apollo, son of Zeus, really was the one\u8232 who put it in my heart to leave Lycia.\'94\
That\'92s what Lycaon\'92s son cried out, boasting aloud.But his sharp arrow hadn\'92t killed Diomedes,\uc0\u8232 who moved back to stand beside his chariot and horses.\u8232 He called to Sthenelus, son of Capaneus.\
\'93My friend, son of Capaneus, come on,\uc0\u8232 get down from the chariot, so you can pull  \'97[110]\u8232 this sharp arrow from my shoulder for me.\'94\
Diomedes spoke. Sthenelus jumped down on the ground.\uc0\u8232 Standing beside him, he pulled out the sharp arrow\u8232 stuck in his shoulder. Blood seeped through the woven shirt.\u8232 Diomedes, expert in war cries, then spoke this prayer:\'93Hear me, Athena, unwearied daughter\u8232 of aegis-bearing Zeus. If you\'92ve ever\u8232 loved my father, stood by his side\u8232 in murderous combat, be my friend now.\u8232 Grant that I kill this man, that I come\u8232 a spear\'92s throw from the one who hit me\u8232 unexpectedly and now boasts about it,\u8232 saying I won\'92t see daylight for much longer.\'94\'a0  \'97[120]\
As Diomedes prayed, Pallas Athena heard.\uc0\u8232 She put fresh strength into his legs and upper arms.\u8232 Standing close by, she spoke. Her words had wings.\
\'93Take courage, Diomedes, in this fight with Trojans.\uc0\u8232 I\'92ve put your father\'92s strength into your chest,\u8232 that shield-bearing horseman\'92s fearless power.\u8232 And I\'92ve removed the filter from your eyes\u8232 which covered them before, so now,\u8232 you\'92ll easily distinguish gods from men.\u8232 If a god comes here and stands against you,\u8232 don\'92t offer to fight any deathless one, \'97[130]\u8232 except for Aphrodite, Zeus\'92 daughter.\'a0\u8232 If she fights, cut her with your sharp bronze.\'94\
Bright-eyed Athena left. Diomedes charged off,\uc0\u8232 joining at once those soldiers fighting in the front,\u8232 his spirit on fire to battle Trojans, seized by frenzy\u8232 three times greater than before. He was like a lion\u8232 slightly hurt by a shepherd guarding his sheep flock\u8232 out in the wilds, when it jumps the wall into the pen.\u8232 But he\'92s not killed it. The wound rouses the beast\'92s strength.\u8232 The shepherd can\'92t keep the charging lion from his sheep,\u8232 who, left unguarded, panic. Huddled in a mass,\'a0  \'97[140]\u8232 they crowd in on one another. So the lion,\u8232 in his hot rage, leaps over the wide sheep-fold wall.\u8232 That\'92s how strong Diomedes went to fight the Trojans\u8232 in his angry fury.\'a0\'a0First he killed Astynous,\u8232 and then Hypeiron, a shepherd of his people.\u8232 His bronze spear hit one right above the nipple.\u8232 His huge sword struck the other on the collar,\u8232 by the shoulder, slicing through the shoulder bone,\u8232 severing it from Hypeiron\'92s neck and back.\u8232 He left them there, to chase Abas and Polyidus,\'a0\u8232 sons of old Eurydamas, interpreter of dreams.\'a0  \'97[150]\u8232 The old man didn\'92t visit them to explain their dreams,\u8232 for mighty Diomedes slaughtered both of them.\u8232 Then Diomedes went after Xanthus and Tho\'f6n,\u8232 two sons of Phaenops, both of whom he loved.\u8232 Worn down by sad old age, he\'92d have no other child,\u8232 no person to inherit all his property.\u8232 Diomedes killed them, took the life they loved,\u8232 leaving bitter grief and anguish for their father,\u8232 who wouldn\'92t welcome them back home from war alive.His next of kin thus divided up his assets.\u8232 Diomedes then challenged two sons of Priam,\u8232 son of Dardanus, both in a single chariot\'97 \'97[160]\u8232 Echemmon and Chromius. Just as a lion\u8232 leaps onto cattle and snaps necks on the cows,\u8232 some heifer grazing in the bushes, so Tydeus\'92s son\u8232 knocked them out of their chariot viciously,\u8232 against their will. Then he stripped their armour.\u8232 His companions took the horses to the ships.\
Aeneas saw Diomedes cutting his way\'a0\uc0\u8232 through ranks of soldiers. He charged on through the fight,\u8232 the clash of spears, looking for Pandarus.\u8232 He met Lycaon\'92s son, a fine and powerful man.\u8232 Standing close by, Aeneas said to him:\'a0\'a0\'93Pandarus,  \'97[170]\u8232 where\'92s your bow, your feathered arrows,\u8232 your reputation as a splendid archer?\u8232 No man can match your expertise in that.\u8232 No one in Lycia can claim to be your better.\u8232 Come, raise your hands in prayer to Zeus,\u8232 then shoot an arrow at that man, whose force\u8232 now dominates the field, hurting Trojans badly,\u8232 hacking limbs from many fine young men,\u8232 unless, of course, it is some angry god,\u8232 displeased with Trojans\'92 sacrificial gifts.\u8232 It\'92s hard to stand against a raging god.\'94\
To Aeneas Lycaon\'92s fine son then replied:\'a0\'93Aeneas, counsellor to bronze-armed Trojans,\'a0  \'97[180]\uc0\u8232 from all I see, I think that man must be\u8232 the warlike son of Tydeus. I know him\u8232 by his shield, the visor on his helmet,and by looking at his horses. I\'92m not sure\u8232 he\'92s not a god. But if he\'92s the man\u8232 I think he is, the fierce son of Tydeus,\u8232 he could not be charging at us in this way\u8232 without help from some god beside him,\u8232 an immortal with a covering cloud\u8232 around his shoulders, the god who pushed aside\u8232 that sharp arrow which struck Diomedes.\u8232 For I\'92ve already shot an arrow at him,\u8232 hit his shoulder through that moulded armour.I thought I\'92d shipped him straight to Hades.\'a0  \'97[190]\u8232 But I didn\'92t kill him. The man must be\u8232 some angry god. But we\'92ve no horses here,\u8232 no chariot for me to chase him in.\u8232 In storage in Lycaon\'92s house somewhere\u8232 there are eleven chariots, new ones, too.\u8232 They\'92re beautiful and made just recently,\u8232 but covered up with drapes. Beside each one\u8232 stand pairs of horses, munching wheat and barley.\u8232 When I was coming here, old soldier Lycaon,in his well-built home, gave me much advice.\u8232 He told me to take chariots and horses\u8232 when I lead Trojans into the hot heart of war.\'a0  \'97[200]\u8232 But I didn\'92t follow his advice. If I had,\u8232 things would have been much better for me.\u8232 But I worried about the horses\'97they\'92d lack forage\u8232 with so many men all crammed together,\u8232 and they were used to eating very well.\u8232 I left them and came to Troy to fight on foot,\u8232 relying on my expertise in archery.\'a0\u8232 But that skill is apparently of little use.\u8232 For already I\'92ve hit two of their best men,\u8232 Tydeus\'92 son and the son of Atreus.\u8232 I\'92ve drawn blood from both of them, it\'92s true,\u8232 but that just made them much more dangerous.\u8232 It was a evil time, that day I took  \'97[210]\u8232 my curved bow off its peg to lead my Lycians\u8232 to lovely Troy, a favour for prince Hector.\u8232 If I get home and see with my own eyes\u8232 my native land, my wife, my large and lofty home,\'a0\u8232 let someone chop my head off on the spot,\u8232 if I don\'92t smash this bow with my own hands\u8232 and throw the pieces in the blazing fire.\u8232 For me it\'92s been completely useless.\'94\
Aeneas, leader of the Trojans, then replied:\
\'93Don\'92t talk like that. Things won\'92t change at all\uc0\u8232 until the two of us go out to challenge\u8232 Diomedes with a chariot and horses,\u8232 until we confront him with our weapons. \'97[220]\u8232 Come, get in my chariot. Then you\'92ll see\u8232 how good these horses are from Tros\'92 stock,\u8232 skilled in rapid movement on the plain,\u8232 in all directions, in pursuit or in retreat.\u8232 This pair will take us safely to the city,\u8232 should Zeus give victory to Diomedes.\u8232 Let\'92s go. Take the whip and glistening reins.\u8232 I\'92ll leave you the horses, so I can fight.\u8232 Or if you fight him, I\'92ll control the horses.\'94\
Lycaon\'92s fine son then said in reply:\'a0\'93Aeneas, you should take the reins yourself,  \'97[230]\uc0\u8232 guide your own horses\'97for they will pull\u8232 your curving chariot that much better\u8232 with a driver they\'92re accustomed to,\u8232 if we must flee Tydeus\'92 son this time.\u8232 If they miss your voice, they may shy or panic,\u8232 or refuse to charge straight into battle.\u8232 Then the son of great-hearted Tydeus\u8232 in his attack may kill us both, and lead\u8232 these swift horses off. You drive the chariot,\u8232 guide your horses. I\'92ll do battle with him\'97my spear will give him a sharp welcome.\'94\
They finished talking, climbed up together, and set off,\uc0\u8232 riding out in a fine chariot, both keen to kill,\u8232 driving the swift horses against Tydeus\'92 son. \'97[240]\u8232 Seeing them coming, Sthenelus, Capaneus\'92 brave son,\u8232 at once spoke up to Diomedes\'97his words had wings.\
\'93Diomedes, son of Tydeus, my heart\'92s\uc0\u8232 true friend, I see two men approaching,\u8232 eager to attack you, two powerful men,\u8232 an outstanding team. One\'92s Pandarus,the skilful archer, who boasts he\'92s Lycaon\'92s son.\u8232 The other is Aeneas, proud Anchises\'92 son,\u8232 that\'92s his claim. His mother\'92s Aphrodite.\u8232 So come, let\'92s retire with the horses,\u8232 in case our quick charge through front lines\u8232 ends up costing you your precious life.\'94  \'97[250]\
Strong Diomedes, with a scowl, answered Sthenelus:\
\'93Don\'92t talk of moving back. For I know well\uc0\u8232 you won\'92t persuade me. By birth it\'92s not in me\u8232 to shirk war or seek refuge. My spirit\'92s strong.Nor am I keen to climb up in the chariot.\u8232 I\'92ll go to fight them as I am, on foot.\u8232 Pallas Athena does not allow me\u8232 to withdraw in fear. Their horses may be fast,\u8232 but they\'92ll not carry them both back again,\u8232 away from us, even if one escapes.\u8232 But I will tell you this\'97keep it in mind\'97\u8232 if Athena, that clever schemer, gives me\'a0  \'97[260]\u8232 great glory and I do kill them both,\u8232 then you must hold our swift horses here,\'a0\u8232 tying these reins up to the chariot rail.\u8232 Remember to run down Aeneas\'92 team,\u8232 then drive those horses from the Trojans\u8232 to well-armed Achaeans. For those horses\u8232 come from the stock that wide-seeing Zeus\u8232 gave Tros, payment for Ganymede, his son.*\u8232 They\'92re the finest horses under the sun,\u8232 beneath the light of day. Anchises,\u8232 king of men, got some of that line by stealth,\u8232 putting his mares into Laomedon\'92s herd\u8232 without his knowledge. Six of those horses  \'97[270]\u8232 became the breeding stock on his estate.\u8232 He kept four of them in his own stable\u8232 and gave Aeneas two, horses so fierce,\u8232 they scatter men before them. If we can,\u8232 we\'92ll catch these two, win ourselves great glory.\'94\
As they talked to each other of their strategy,\uc0\u8232 the fast horses quickly brought the two men closer.\u8232 Lycaon\'92s worthy son spoke first, shouting out:\'a0\'93Great spirited, warlike son of Tydeus,\u8232 that noble man, I see that my sharp arrow,\u8232 a bitter shaft, did not destroy you.\u8232 So now I\'92ll try to hit you with my spear.\'94\
He spoke, balanced his long-shadowed spear, and threw it.  \'97[280]\uc0\u8232 The spear hit the son of Tydeus on his shield.\u8232 The bronze point pierced it, but stopped at the body armour.\u8232 Seeing that, Lycaon\'92s fine son let out a mighty cheer:\
\'93You\'92re hit, right in the ribs. You won\'92t last long.\uc0\u8232 I think you\'92ve given me a glorious triumph.\'94\
Unperturbed, powerful Diomedes said to him:\'93You\'92re wrong. You haven\'92t hit me. In my view,\uc0\u8232 this matter won\'92t end for the two of you,\u8232 until one of you falls dead, and his blood\u8232 satisfies in full hard warlike Ares.\'94\
That said, he threw his spear. Athena guided it  \'97[290]\uc0\u8232 straight to Pandarus\'92 nose, directly by the eyes.\u8232 It smashed through his white teeth. The tireless bronze\u8232 sliced through his tongue at its root, coming out his chin,\u8232 right at the tip. Pandarus fell from the chariot,\u8232 his brightly shining armour rattling round him.The swiftly running horses swerved aside.\u8232 Then and there his life-force, his spirit, left him.\u8232 Aeneas then leapt down with his long spear and shield,\u8232 fearing Achaeans would somehow haul away the corpse.\u8232 He made a stand by Pandarus, like a lion,\u8232 confident of its strength. He held his spear in front,\u8232 his round shield, too, with fearful shouts, fiercely eager \'97[300]\u8232 to kill anyone who came up to confront him.\u8232 The son of Tydeus picked up a stone, a massive rock\u8232 which no two men now alive could lift. He threw it\'a0\u8232 all by himself with ease. It hit Aeneas\'92 hip,\u8232 where thigh meets pelvis, what people call the hip joint.\u8232 The boulder smashed the socket and both tendons round it.\u8232 The rough edges on the rock scraped off his skin.\u8232 Falling to his knees, warlike Aeneas stayed down,\u8232 supporting himself with his strong hand on the ground.\u8232 Black night came down and covered both his eyes.  \'97[310]\u8232 Aeneas, king of men, would have perished there,\u8232 if Aphrodite, Zeus\'92 daughter, hadn\'92t seen him right away.\u8232 She was his mother\'97she\'92d conceived him with Anchises,\'a0\u8232 while he was tending cattle. Wrapping her white arms\u8232 around the son she loved, she hid him in the folds\u8232 of her bright gown, to ward off any spears,\u8232 should some Danaan driving with swift horses\u8232 hurl a spear into his chest and take his life.\u8232 She then began to carry her dear son from the fight.\
Meanwhile, Sthenelus, son of Capaneus,\uc0\u8232 did not forget what Diomedes, skilled in war cries,  \'97[320]\u8232 told him. He pulled his sure-footed horses to one side,\u8232 beyond the fight, tying the reins onto the rail,\u8232 and then went after those fine-maned horses of Aeneas.\u8232 He drove the animals away from Trojan lines\u8232 towards well-armed Achaeans. There he gave them\u8232 to his dear companion De\'efpylus, whom he esteemed\u8232 above all others the same age as himself,\u8232 since they both thought alike. He instructed him\u8232 to take them to the hollow ships. Then brave Sthenelus\u8232 climbed back into his chariot, grabbed the shining reins,\u8232 and raced the strong horses back, keen to rejoin Diomedes.\
But Diomedes with his ruthless bronze had gone\'a0  \'97[330]\uc0\u8232 to run down Aphrodite\'97knowing she was not a god\u8232 who could do much in battle, not one of those\u8232 who control men\'92s wars. She was no Athena,\u8232 no goddess Strife, who destroys whole cities.\u8232 He chased her through the crowded battle zone.\u8232 When he met her, great-hearted Tydeus\'92 son\u8232 charged, lunging with his sharp spear at Aphrodite.\u8232 His weapon wounded her slim wrist, piercing the skin\u8232 above her hand, right through her godlike robe,\u8232 a garment the Graces had made for her themselves.*Immortal divine fluid then flowed out, ichor,\u8232 which circulates only in the blessed gods.  \'97[340]\u8232 They don\'92t eat food or drink down gleaming wine.\u8232 Hence, they lack blood, and men call them immortal.\u8232 Aphrodite screamed wildly and let go of her son.\u8232 But Phoebus Apollo caught him in his hands,\u8232 then shielded him with a dark cloud, just in case\u8232 some fast-riding Danaan threw a spear into his chest\u8232 and took away his life. Then Diomedes,\u8232 expert in war cries, shouted loudly:\'93Daughter of Zeus,leave war and fights alone. Isn\'92t it enough\u8232 for you to fool around with feeble women?\u8232 If you start loitering on the battlefield,  \'97[350]\u8232 I think the war will make you shake with terror,\u8232 even though you learn about it from a distance.\'94\
Diomedes spoke. Aphrodite left in agony,\uc0\u8232 distressed and fearful. Wind-swift Iris came to her,\u8232 led her off, out of the crowd, moaning in pain,\u8232 her fair skin stained and wounded. She came across\u8232 fierce Ares, seated on the left flank of the fight,his spear and his fast horses resting on a cloud.\u8232 Falling on her knees, she implored her dear brother,\u8232 pleading hard for his golden-bridled horses:\
\'93Dear brother, save me. Give me your horses,\uc0\u8232 so I may go back up to Mount Olympus,\u8232 the immortals\'92 home. My wound pains me a lot.\'a0  \'97[360]\u8232 A mortal man inflicted this wound on me,\u8232 Tydeus\'92 son, who\'92d now fight Father Zeus himself.\'94\
At this, Ares gave her his golden-bridled horses.\uc0\u8232 She climbed up in the chariot, her fond heart suffering.\'a0\u8232 Getting in beside her, Iris picked up the reins,\u8232 then lashed the horses forward. They flew on willingly.\u8232 At once they reached the gods\'92 home, steep Olympus.\u8232 There wind-swift Iris stopped the horses, untied them\u8232 from the chariot, and gave them heavenly fodder.\u8232 Aphrodite threw herself into her mother\'92s lap,  \'97[370]\u8232 divine Dione, who took her daughter in her arms,\u8232 caressed her with her hand, then said:\'a0\'93My dear child,\u8232 which of the heavenly gods has done this,\u8232 acted so brazenly against you, as if\u8232 you\'92d done something evil in broad daylight?\'94\
Laughter-loving Aphrodite answered her:\
\'93Proud Diomedes, son of Tydeus,\uc0\u8232 wounded me, for I was carrying off\u8232 Aeneas, my dear son, away from battle.\u8232 Of all men, he\'92s the one I love the most.\u8232 Now grim war is not just Trojans and Achaeans,\u8232 for Danaans fight against immortals, too.\'94 \'97[380]\
Dione, queen among the goddesses, replied:\'a0\'93Be brave, my child, hold on, though you\'92re in pain.Many of us living on Olympus\uc0\u8232 have been hurt by men in our attempts\u8232 to bring harsh troubles on each other.\u8232 Ares suffered, too, when mighty Otus\u8232 and Ephialtes, children of Alo\'ebus,\u8232 tied him up in powerful manacles,\u8232 then kept him prisoner in a brass jar\u8232 for thirteen months. Ares would\'92ve died there,\u8232 with all his war-lust, if their step-mother,\u8232 fair E\'ebriboea, had not told Hermes.He stole Ares secretly. Ares was exhausted. \'97[390]\u8232 That harsh imprisonment was breaking him.\u8232 Hera suffered, as well, when Hercules,\u8232 the powerful son of Amphitryon,\u8232 hit her right breast with a three-barbed arrow.\u8232 She was wracked by pain beyond all cure.\u8232 With them huge Hades also suffered\u8232 from a sharp arrow, when this same man,\u8232 this Hercules, a son of aegis-bearing Zeus,\u8232 shot him in Pylos, among the corpses there,inflicting pain. Hades went straight to Zeus\u8232 at home on Olympus\'97his heart enraged,\u8232 in agony, the arrow buried deep\u8232 in his strong shoulder. He was incensed.  \'97[400]\u8232 Pae\'ebon healed him with pain-killing herbs\u8232 smeared on the wound, for Hades was immortal.\u8232 What a wretch he was, that Hercules,\u8232 \'a0a trouble maker. He didn\'92t hesitate\u8232 to commit bad acts with that bow of his\u8232 against the gods who dwell on Mount Olympus.But Athena, the bright-eyed goddess,\u8232 prompted Tydeus\'92 son to go at you.\u8232 \'a0Still, he\'92s a fool for not remembering\u8232 the man who fights wars against immortals\u8232 does not live long. His children have no chance\u8232 to prattle to their father at his knee,\u8232 once he comes home from war\'92s grim butchery.\u8232 Diomedes is surely powerful\'97  \'97[410]\u8232 but he should take care. A greater power than you\u8232 may come against him. Then Aegialeia,\u8232 wise daughter of Adrestus, brave wife\u8232 of horse-taming Diomedes, with cries of sorrow\u8232 will rouse all her dear household from their sleep,\u8232 lamenting the husband whom she married,\u8232 the best of the Achaeans.\'94\'a0\'a0As she said this,\u8232 with her hand Dione cleaned away the ichor\u8232 on Aphrodite\'92s wrist, healing the hand,\u8232 curing Aphrodite of her pain. Looking on,\u8232 Athena and Hera teased Zeus, son of Cronos:  \'97[420]\'a0\'93Father Zeus, you won\'92t get angry with me\'a0\u8232 for what I say, will you? Aphrodite,\u8232 trying to coax some new Achaean woman\u8232 into running off with one of those Trojans\u8232 she loves so much, must have been caressing\u8232 some well-dressed Achaean lady and scratched\u8232 her delicate hand on a golden brooch.\'94\
When they spoke, the father of gods and men smiled,\uc0\u8232 called for golden Aphrodite, and then said to her:\
\'93My child, this warfare is not your business.\uc0\u8232 You should concern yourself with your own work\'97\u8232 love, especially erotic love in marriage.\u8232 Swift Ares and Athena will take care of this.\'94\'a0  \'97[430]\
As the gods talked the matter over with each other,\uc0\u8232 Diomedes, expert at war cries, sought out Aeneas.\u8232 Though he knew Apollo himself was shielding him,\u8232 he had no fear at all of that great god, pushing on\u8232 to kill Aeneas, then strip his fine armour from him.\u8232 Three times he charged forward, in a frenzy for the kill.\u8232 Three times Apollo pushed back his shining shield.\u8232 But when for the fourth time he came on like a god,\'a0\u8232 Apollo, the far shooter, in a terrifying voice, cried out:\'a0\'93Take care, son of Tydeus. Go back. \'97[440]\u8232 Don\'92t think you\'92re equal to the gods.\u8232 The race of men who walk upon the ground\u8232 can never match the race of deathless gods.\'94\
At these words, the son of Tydeus drew back somewhat,\uc0\u8232 avoiding the anger of Apollo, the far shooter.\u8232 Apollo put Aeneas some distance from the fight,\u8232 on sacred Pergamus, where his temple stood.\u8232 There, in the large shrine, Leto and Artemis,\'a0\u8232 the archer goddess, healed Aeneas, restoring him\u8232 to his former power and magnificence.\u8232 Apollo of the silver bow then made an image, \'97[450]\u8232 a copy of Aeneas, with matching armour,\u8232 around which Trojans and brave Achaeans fought,\u8232 hacking away at ox-hide covering their chests,\u8232 at the round shields or smaller shields with fringes.\u8232 Phoebus Apollo then called to foolhardy Ares:\
\'93Ares, Ares, you bloodstained man-killer,\uc0\u8232 can\'92t you return to Diomedes\u8232 and remove him from the battle? Right now,\u8232 he\'92d stand and fight with Father Zeus himself.\u8232 First, he wounded Aphrodite on the wrist,\u8232 fighting at close quarters. Then he flung himself,\u8232 like some god, at me.\'94\'a0After saying this,\u8232 Apollo took a seat high up on Pergamus.  \'97[460]\u8232 Murderous Ares went in among the Trojan ranks,\u8232 inspiring the troops.\'a0\'a0In the shape of Acamas,\u8232 Thracian leader, he yelled at Priam\'92s royal sons:\'a0\'93You sons of Priam, that god-nurtured king,why are you still allowing the Achaeans\u8232 to keep slaughtering your troops? Are you waiting\u8232 until they fight by the well-built city gates?\u8232 There lies great-hearted Anchises\'92 son,\u8232 Aeneas, whom we honour as we do prince Hector.\u8232 Come, let\'92s save our brave comrade from the battle roar.\'94\
Ares\'92 words gave each man courage and blood-zest for war.  \'97[470]\uc0\u8232 Then Sarpedon spoke to Hector, bitterly complaining:\
\'93Hector, where\'92s that courage you used to have?\uc0\u8232 You kept claiming you could guard the city\'a0\u8232 on your own, without your people or your allies,\u8232 using your own family and relatives.\u8232 Looking round now, I can\'92t see them here,\u8232 any of them. They\'92ve all taken refuge,\u8232 like dogs around a lion. Those of us\u8232 who\'92ve come as allies, we do all the fighting.\u8232 I marched here as an ally, travelling far,\u8232 for Lycia is a long, long way from here,\u8232 by the swirling river Xanthus, where I left\u8232 my dear wife, my infant son, much property,  \'97[480]\u8232 something poor men covet. But for all that,\u8232 I urge my Lycian troops to action,\u8232 I stand and fight all comers on my own,\u8232 when I\'92ve nothing for the enemy to take.\u8232 But you stand around, without urging men\u8232 to fight back or defend their wives. Watch out.\u8232 You may become a prize yourself\'97a trophy\u8232 for your enemies. You\'92ll be like a fish\u8232 snared in the meshes of a fatal net.\u8232 They\'92ll quickly smash your well-built city.You should be thinking of this day and night,\'a0  \'97[490]\u8232 imploring leaders of your famous allies\u8232 to hold on staunchly, thus preventing them\u8232 from mounting any serious complaints.\'94\
Sarpedon\'92s speech stung Hector\'92s heart. Fully armed,\uc0\u8232 he quickly jumped down from his chariot to the ground.\u8232 Waving two sharp spears, he roamed through all the army,\u8232 rousing men to fight, steeling hearts for dreadful war.\u8232 Troops rallied once more and turned to face Achaeans.\u8232 Argives, too, stood firm. The men did not withdraw.\u8232 As on the sacred threshing floor wind blows the chaff,\u8232 while men stand winnowing the crop, when Demeter,  \'97[500]\u8232 with her golden hair, separates the grain from chaff\u8232 in the rushing breeze, and piles of chaff grow whiter,\u8232 so then Achaean troops grew white, covered with dust\u8232 stirred up by horses\'92 hooves. It coloured the sky bronze.\u8232 So the chariots came on to battle once again,\u8232 wheeled round by drivers\'92 strong ferocious hands.\u8232 Headstrong Ares assisted Trojans in the battle,\u8232 concealing them in darkness, roaming everywhere,carrying out his orders from Phoebus Apollo,\u8232 god with the golden sword, who\'92d told him to arouse\u8232 the Trojans\'92 spirits when he saw Pallas Athena \'97[510]\u8232 leave the fighting, for she was helping the Danaans.\
Apollo then sent Aeneas from his costly shrine,\uc0\u8232 putting fighting strength into this warrior\'92s heart,\u8232 his people\'92s shepherd. Aeneas rejoined his friends,\u8232 who were overjoyed to see him safe and sound\'97alive\'97\u8232 approaching with brave spirits. They didn\'92t question him.\u8232 They had too much other work at hand to do.\u8232 For Apollo, god with the silver bow, and Ares,\u8232 the man killer, along with insatiable Strife,\u8232 had stirred things up there on the battlefield.\
Then the two Ajaxes, Odysseus, and Diomedes\uc0\u8232 roused Danaans, urging them to battle.  \'97[520]\u8232 They did not fear the Trojans\'92 powerful attack\u8232 and stood their ground like clouds set in place by Zeus,\u8232 son of Cronos, above a range of mountain peaks\u8232 on a windless day, quite motionless, while the force\u8232 of North Wind and other raging blasts is sound asleep.When these storm winds blow, they scatter shadowy clouds.\u8232 That\'92s the way Danaans held their positions then,\u8232 \'a0without flinching, without fear. The son of Atreus\u8232 moved through the troops and gave out many orders.\
\'93My friends, be men. Let courage fill your hearts.\uc0\u8232 In the heat of battle remember honour,  \'97[530]\u8232 each man\'92s reputation. When men recall\u8232 their honour, more troops are saved than slaughtered.\u8232 Those who run away lose life and fame.\'94\
Agamemnon spoke, then quickly hurled his spear.\uc0\u8232 He hit a good fighting man, comrade to Aeneas,\u8232 great-hearted De\'efco\'f6n, son of Pergasus,\u8232 whom Trojans honoured as they did king Priam\'92s sons,\u8232 for he was quick to take his place among the best,\u8232 the men who do their fighting at the very front.\u8232 Mighty Agamemnon\'92s spear struck against his shield,\u8232 but the shield could not hold out\'97the bronze went through,\u8232 piercing De\'efco\'f6n\'92s belt and sinking in his gut.\u8232 He fell with a thud, his armour rattling round him. \'97[540]\
Then Aeneas killed two of the best Danaans,\uc0\u8232 Crethon and Orsilochus, whose father lived\u8232 in well-built Phere, a man of property,\u8232 descended from the river Alpheus, whose broad streams\u8232 flow through Pylian land. The river bore Orsilochus,\u8232 king of many men, and Orsilochus fathered\u8232 great-hearted Diocles, to whom were born twin sons,\u8232 Crethon and Orsilochus, experts in all aspects of war.\u8232 These two, once grown, came with Argives in black ships  \'97[550]\u8232 to Troy, city rich in horses, to win honour\u8232 for Agamemnon and Menelaus, sons of Atreus.\u8232 Death\'92s final moment took them in. As two lions,\u8232 cared for by their mother in a deep thick forest\u8232 on a mountain peak, steal stout sheep and cattle\u8232 and plunder people\'92s farmsteads, until they perish,\u8232 killed by sharp bronze in the hands of men, so these two died,\u8232 cut down by Aeneas. They fell like lofty pines.  \'97[560]\
War-loving Menelaus felt pity for these two,\uc0\u8232 seeing them die. He made his way through the men\'92s front ranks,\u8232 armed in glittering bronze, brandishing his spear.\u8232 Ares stirred his battle spirit, planning his death\'a0\u8232 at Aeneas\'92 hand. But then Antilochus,\u8232 son of great-hearted Nestor, saw Menelaus.\u8232 He hurried through the foremost ranks, in his concern\u8232 for this shepherd of the people, that if he came to grief,\u8232 all their efforts would be completely futile.\u8232 Menelaus and Aeneas, now faced each other,\u8232 with eager hands and spears, ready to begin the fight.\u8232 But when Antilochus stood by Menelaus,\'a0  \'97[570]\u8232 Aeneas, though a swift fighter, started to withdraw,\u8232 seeing these two men standing their ground together.\'a0\u8232 So Menelaus and Antilochus dragged the corpses\u8232 of Crethon and Orsilochus to Achaean troops,\u8232 placed the two dead heroes in the hands of friends,\u8232 then turned back to fight with those in the front ranks.\
Antilochus and Menelaus then killed Pylaemenes,\uc0\u8232 a man like Ares, leader of the Paphlagonians,\u8232 great-hearted, shield-bearing men. The son of Atreus,\u8232 famous spearman Menelaus, struck him,\u8232 as he stood up in his chariot, hitting him\u8232 right on his collar bone. Antilochus hit Mydon,\'a0  \'97[580]\u8232 Atymnius\'92 noble son, the attendant driver,\u8232 as he was wheeling his sure-footed horses round.\u8232 He struck him with a rock square on the elbow.\u8232 The reins, decorated with rich ivory,\u8232 fell from his hands down onto the dusty ground.\u8232 Antilochus sprang out and with his sword struck Mydon\u8232 on the temple. Gasping with pain, Mydon pitched over,\u8232 and tumbled from the well-made chariot headfirst,\u8232 his head and shoulders disappearing in the dirt.\u8232 For some time he stayed stuck, buried in deep sand,\u8232 until his horses kicked him flat, level with the dust,\u8232 stamping him into the ground, as Antilochus\u8232 whipped them on, leading them back to Achaean troops.\
Hector saw this from the lines. He ran against them,\'a0  \'97[590]\uc0\u8232 shouting wildly, with strong Trojan soldiers in support.\u8232 Leading these men came Ares along with fearful Strife,\u8232 bringing war\'92s pitiless and murderous confusion.\u8232 Ares worked with a huge spear in his hands, moving round,\u8232 sometimes behind Hector, sometimes in front of him.\
When Diomedes, skilled in war cries, noticed Ares,\'a0\uc0\u8232 he shuddered\'97just a man crossing a large plain\u8232 stops at a raging river rushing to the sea,\u8232 looks helplessly at swirling foam, and moves away\'97\u8232 so Tydeus\'92 son backed off then, saying to his men:  \'97[600]\
\'93My friends, we\'92re so amazed prince Hector\uc0\u8232 is such a spearman, so courageous, warlike.\u8232 But he\'92s always got some god beside him,\u8232 to ward off destruction. Right now, it\'92s Ares\u8232 he\'92s has with him, looking like a mortal man.\u8232 Stay turned towards the Trojans, but fall back.\u8232 Don\'92t try to fight it out with gods.\'94\
Diomedes spoke. Trojans then approached much closer.\uc0\u8232 Hector killed two men, keen warriors\'97Menesthes\u8232 and Anchialus\'97both riding in a single chariot.\'a0  \'97[610]\u8232 Seeing them fall, great Telamonian Ajax felt pity.\u8232 He approached, stood firm, then threw his shining spear.\u8232 The spear struck Amphion, son of Selagus,\u8232 who owned much property in Paesus, with many crops.\u8232 Fate led him to become allied with Priam and his sons.\u8232 Ajax, son of Telamon, hit Amphion in the belt.\'a0\u8232 The long-shadowed spear struck hard, low in his gut.\u8232 He collapsed with a crash. Noble Ajax ran up\u8232 to strip the armour off, but Trojans showered him\u8232 with bright, sharp spears. His shield took many hits.\'a0  \'97[620]\u8232 Pushing his heel into the corpse he pulled out his bronze spear,\u8232 but the hail of weapons stopped him stripping offAmphion\'92s fine armour from his shoulders.\u8232 He feared the fierce brave Trojans standing by the corpse,\u8232 for many spearmen crowded him and forced him back.\u8232 And Ajax, for all his massive size and strength,\'a0\u8232 for all his courage, had to withdraw, shaken.\
As these men toiled in frantic battle, powerful fate\uc0\u8232 drove strong, brave Tlepolemus, son of Hercules,\u8232 against godlike Sarpedon. These two men approached,  \'97[630]\u8232 facing each other at close quarters, son and grandson\u8232 of cloud-gathering Zeus. Tlepolemus called out first:\
\'93Sarpedon, counsellor to the Lycians,\uc0\u8232 what forces you to cower down right here,\u8232 quite ignorant in battle? Those who say\u8232 you\'92re aegis-bearing Zeus\'92 son are liars.\u8232 You\'92re far inferior to those men born of Zeus\u8232 in times long past. Consider mighty Hercules,\u8232 my father. He was quite different, they say\'97\u8232 steadfast, brave, his spirit like a lion.\u8232 He came here once for Laomedon\'92s horses.  \'97[640]\u8232 With fewer men and only six ships, he sacked\u8232 the Trojan city and emptied all its streets.*\u8232 But you\'92ve a paltry spirit, your troops\u8232 are withering away. And it\'92s impossible\u8232 you\'92ll help the Trojans by coming here\u8232 from Lycia, even if you\'92re powerful.\u8232 I\'92ll kill you, and you\'92ll pass through Hades\'92 gate.\'94\
Sarpedon, Lycian leader, then said in reply:\
\'93Yes, Tlepolemus, Hercules did destroy\uc0\u8232 sacred Ilion, but through the foolishness\u8232 of the city\'92s king, high-born Laomedon,\u8232 who tricked the man who\'92d worked so well for him.  \'97[650]\u8232 He didn\'92t offer Hercules the horses\u8232 he\'92d come so far to get. As for you,\u8232 I\'92ll now see to your death, that fatal blackness.\'a0\u8232 You\'92ll give me great glory, and your life\u8232 you\'92ll give to famous horseman Hades.\'94\
Sarpedon spoke. Tlepolemus raised his ash spear high.\uc0\u8232 Then two long spears flew from their hands together.\u8232 Sarpedon\'92s spear hit Tlepolemus right in the neck.\u8232 The cruel point kept going. Dark night covered up his eyes.\u8232 Tlepolemus\'92 long spear struck Sarpedon in his left thigh.\'a0  \'97[660]\u8232 Its bloodthirsty point pierced him, aiming for the bone.\u8232 On this occasion, Father Zeus held off his fate.\u8232 His brave companions carried off godlike Sarpedon,pulled down by the long spear\'92s weight, as it dragged behind.\u8232 No one thought to pull the ash spear from his leg,\u8232 so he could walk. They were in such a rush to shift him.\
On the opposing side, well-armed Achaeans\uc0\u8232 carried Tlepolemus away from battle.\u8232 Godlike Odysseus noticed them, his spirit steady,\u8232 but his fond heart was burning, as he turned over \'97[670]\u8232 in his mind, whether to chase after that son of Zeus,\u8232 loud thunderer, or stay to kill more Lycians.\u8232 But Fate did not decree that brave Odysseus\u8232 should kill Zeus\'92 mighty son with his sharp bronze.\u8232 Athena turned his heart against that Lycian crowd.\u8232 So he killed Coeranus, Alastor, Chromius,\u8232 Alcandrus, Halius, No\'ebmon, and Prytanis.\u8232 Lord Odysseus would have killed still more Lycians,\u8232 if Hector of the flashing helmet had not seen him,\'a0  \'97[680]\u8232 then gone through the ranks in front, armed in shining bronze,\u8232 terrifying Danaans. Sarpedon, son of Zeus,\u8232 was glad to see him coming. He implored Hector:\'a0\'93Son of Priam, don\'92t let me lie here,\'a0\u8232 a trophy for Danaans. Rescue me.\u8232 Let me remain forever in your city,\u8232 since it seems I\'92ll not be going home\u8232 to cheer up my dear wife and infant son.\'94\
Hector of the flashing helmet made no reply.\uc0\u8232 He charged on, eager to force the Argives quickly back, \'97[690]\u8232 to massacre large numbers of their soldiers.\u8232 God-like Sarpedon\'92s noble comrades placed him\u8232 by a fine oak tree, sacred to aegis-bearing Zeus.\u8232 Pelagon, his strong, well-loved attendant, then pushed\'a0\u8232 the ash spear straight out through his thigh. Sarpedon fainted.\u8232 A mist fell, clouding his eyes, but soon he breathed again.\u8232 North Wind\'92s breeze revived him, blowing air into his heart,\u8232 as his spirit panted, gasping his life away.\
Argives weren\'92t driven back to their black ships by Ares\uc0\u8232 or by bronze-armed Hector. Nor did they wheel about \'97[700]\u8232 to battle Trojans face to face. They kept moving back,\u8232 once they realized Ares was with the Trojans.\
Among the Argives, who were the first and last men killed\uc0\u8232 by Hector, son of Priam, and brazen Ares?\'a0\u8232 They were godlike Teuthras, Orestes the charioteer,\u8232 Trechus, an Aetolian spearman, Oenomaus,\u8232 Helenus, son of Oenops, and Oresbius,\u8232 with his glittering belt, a man who lived in Hyle\u8232 and kept himself preoccupied with wealth\u8232 along the shores of lake Cephisia. Beside him\u8232 lived even more Boeotians, owners of rich lands.\'a0  \'97[710]\
White-armed goddess Hera saw Argives being slaughtered\uc0\u8232 in the thick of battle. She spoke out to Athena.\'a0\'93Alas, Athena, child of aegis-bearing Zeus,\u8232 tireless one, we\'92ve made an empty promise\u8232 to Menelaus, that he\'92d wipe out Troy,\u8232 that well-built city, before going home,\u8232 if we let murderous Ares rage on like this.\u8232 Come, let\'92s both recall our fighting power.\'94\
Athena, the bright-eyed goddess, agreed with Hera\'92s words.\'a0  \'97[720]\uc0\u8232 So that revered goddess Hera, daughter of great Cronos,\u8232 went to prepare her horses with their golden bridles.\u8232 Then Hebe quickly checked the chariot\'92s curved wheels,\u8232 bronze with eight spokes each, on axles made of iron,\u8232 wheel rims made out of imperishable gold,\u8232 edged with tires of close-fitted bronze, an amazing sight.\u8232 Silver axle boxes revolve on either side.\u8232 The body of the chariot has gold and silver strips.\u8232 Two rails run round it. The pole is made of silver.\u8232 On its end Hebe tied the cross-piece, lovely gold,  \'97[730]\u8232 then fixed the golden collar straps. Hera, keen for war,\u8232 led her swift-footed horses out into their yoke.\u8232 Then Athena, daughter of aegis-bearing Zeus,\u8232 threw on her father\'92s porch the embroidered gown\'a0\u8232 which she had made herself with her own hands.\u8232 She then put on the robe of cloud-gatherer Zeus\u8232 and armed herself with weapons for that wretched war.\u8232 She slung across her shoulders the fearsome tasselled aegis,\u8232 its borders woven with Fear, Strife, Force, terrorizing Panic, \'97[740]\u8232 with the chilling, horrifying and monstrous Gorgon\'92s head\'97\u8232 the horrifying emblem of aegis-bearing Zeus.\u8232 On her head she placed a double-ridged gold helmet,\u8232 men from a hundred cities etched upon its four-part crest.\u8232 She set foot in her blazing chariot, grasping\'a0\u8232 her huge, strong, heavy spear, with which she kills men,\u8232 heroes who annoy her, goddess with a mighty father.\u8232 Hera quickly lashed the horses with her whip.\u8232 The gates of heaven scraped open on their own.\u8232 The Seasons supervise them, for they\'92re in charge\u8232 of great heavenly Olympus, opening up  \'97[750]\u8232 the dense packed clouds or closing them again.\u8232 Through these gates the goddesses led out their horses,\u8232 Hera lashing them ahead. They met the son of Cronos,\u8232 sitting some distance from the other gods,\u8232 on the highest crest of many-ridged Olympus.\u8232 Hera, white-armed goddess, reined in the horses,\u8232 then spoke to Zeus, most high son of Cronos:\
\'93Father Zeus, aren\'92t you angry with Ares\uc0\u8232 for killing off those warriors? He\'92s wiped out\u8232 so many Achaean men, good ones, too,\u8232 and so rashly. It\'92s not right. It pains me.\u8232 Meanwhile, Aphrodite and Apollo,\'a0  \'97[760]\u8232 with his silver bow, are enjoying themselves,\u8232 happy about this madman they\'92ve unleashed,\u8232 who has no sense of what\'92s appropriate.\u8232 Father Zeus, would I annoy you very much\u8232 if I hurt Ares and chased him from this fight?\'94\
Cloud gatherer Zeus smiled and then said in reply:\
\'93All right, then, do that. But set Athena,\uc0\u8232 goddess of the battle spoils, against him.\u8232 For she\'92s the one who\'92s most accustomed\u8232 to inflicting nasty pains on Ares.\'94\
White-armed goddess Hera agreed with what Zeus said.\uc0\u8232 She whipped the horses on. They flew off willingly,\'a0\u8232 mid-way between the starry heaven and earth.\u8232 As far as a man on a height can see in the distant haze\'a0  \'97[770]\u8232 as he looks out across the wine-dark sea, that\'92s how far\u8232 gods\'92 snorting horses vault in just one stride.\u8232 When they came to Troy\'92s two flowing rivers,\u8232 where the Simoeis and the Scamander meet,\u8232 white-armed goddess Hera stopped the horses,\u8232 loosed them from the chariot and hid them in thick cloud.\u8232 Simoeis produced ambrosia for them to eat.\u8232 The goddesses moved stealthily, like wild pigeons,eager to assist the Argive troops. They reached that place\u8232 where most of the bravest men were fighting, in a crowd\'a0  \'97[780]\u8232 by mighty Diomedes, tamer of horses,\u8232 like lions who eat raw meat or wild boars whose strength\u8232 is not easily exhausted. In that place Hera,\u8232 white-armed goddess, stood up, looking just like Stentor,\u8232 a great-hearted, loud-throated man, whose voice could shout\u8232 with the strength of fifty men. Hera cried out:\
\'93Shame on you, you Argive warriors.\uc0\u8232 You\'92re a disgrace, good only for display.\'a0\u8232 When lord Achilles used to go to battle,\u8232 the Trojans didn\'92t dare to venture out\u8232 beyond the Dardanian gates. They feared\u8232 his mighty spear. But now they\'92re fighting \'97[790]\u8232 well outside the city, by our hollow ships.\'94\
With these words, she roused each man\'92s heart and spirit.\uc0\u8232 Bright-eyed Athena quickly moved to Diomedes.\u8232 She found that king beside his chariot and horses,\u8232 recovering from the wound from Pandarus\'92 arrow.\u8232 The sweat under the wide strap of his round shield\'a0\u8232 was bothering him. The chafing made his arms grow tired.\u8232 He was lifting up the strap, wiping off dark blood.\u8232 Setting her hand on the chariot yoke, the goddess said:\'a0\'93Tydeus had a son not much like his father.\'a0  \'97[800]\u8232 He may have been short, but he was a fighter.\u8232 When I would not allow him into battle\u8232 or to display himself, that time he came\u8232 to Thebes alone, far from his Achaeans,\u8232 in the middle of all those Cadmeans,\u8232 I told him to be quiet at the palace feast.\'a0\u8232 But he possessed a powerful spirit\u8232 always active in him. So he challenged\u8232 Cadmean young men and beat them easily.\u8232 That\'92s how much I helped him. Now I stand here,\u8232 beside you, taking care of you, your friend.\u8232 And I\'92m telling you to fight the Trojans. \'97[810]\u8232 But you\'92re either weary after so much action,\u8232 your limbs worn out, or fear has made you timid.\u8232 If so, then you\'92re no son of Tydeus,\u8232 the son of warlike Oeneus.\'94In answer to Athena, mighty Diomedes said:\
\'93I recognize you, goddess daughter\uc0\u8232 of aegis-bearing Zeus. I\'92ll speak to you\u8232 quite openly, concealing nothing. It\'92s not\u8232 that fear has made me hesitant or anxious.\u8232 But I\'92m remembering your own instructions,\u8232 what you laid down. You told me not to fight\u8232 face to face with any immortal god,\u8232 unless Zeus\'92 daughter Aphrodite  \'97[820]\u8232 should come to battle. With my sharp bronze,\'a0\u8232 I was to wound her. I\'92ve pulled myself back,\u8232 and told the other Argives to stay here\u8232 since I see Ares dominates the fight.\'94\
Bright-eyed goddess Athena answered him:\
\'93Diomedes, son of Tydeus,\uc0\u8232 you fill my heart with joy. Don\'92t fear Ares\u8232 or any other immortal deity.\u8232 For I\'92ll give you all the help you need.\u8232 But come, first let your sure-footed horses\u8232 charge at Ares. Hit him up close. Have no fear\u8232 of headstrong Ares, that madman, born evil, \'97[830]\u8232 that fickle god. Just now he gave his word\u8232 to me and Hera too that he would fight\u8232 the Trojans and assist the Argives. But now,\u8232 he\'92s forgotten that and helps the Trojans.\'94\
Saying this, Athena grabbed Sthenelus\'92 hand\uc0\u8232 and hauled him from the chariot to the ground.\u8232 He jumped up at once. The goddess climbed up eagerly\u8232 beside lord Diomedes in the chariot.\u8232 The oaken axle groaned aloud, weighed down,\'a0\u8232 bearing the fearful goddess and the finest man.\u8232 Pallas Athena took up the reins and whip. \'97[840]\u8232 First, she led the sure-footed horses against Ares.\u8232 He was removing armour from huge Periphas,\u8232 Ochesius\'92 fine son, by far the best of the Aetolians.\u8232 Blood-stained Ares was stripping him of all his weapons.\u8232 Then Athena put Hades\'92 helmet on her head,\u8232 so she was invisible to mighty Ares.\u8232 But man-killing Ares did see Diomedes.\u8232 He let the body of huge Periphas lie there,\u8232 where he\'92d first killed him and ripped out his spirit.\u8232 He strode straight up to horse-taming Diomedes.\u8232 When the two came to close quarters and faced each other, \'97[850]\u8232 Ares thrust his bronze spear first, over the yoke\u8232 and horses\'92 reins, eager to take Diomedes\'92 life.\u8232 Athena, bright-eyed goddess, hands gripping the reins,\u8232 shoved the spear aside, so its thrust was harmless,\u8232 above the chariot. Diomedes, skilled in war cries,\u8232 then made the second thrust with his bronze spear.\u8232 Pallas Athena guided the weapon right to Ares\'92 gut,\'a0\u8232 the lower part where his waist band went around him.\u8232 Diomedes wounded Ares, piercing his fair skin,\u8232 then pulled back on his spear. Brazen Ares roared\u8232 as loud as the screams of nine or ten thousand men \'97[860]\u8232 when they clash in war. Fear seized Achaeans\'97Trojans, too.\u8232 They shuddered. That\'92s how strong that cry sounded\u8232 as it came from Ares, insatiable for war.\u8232 Just as a dark mist moves upward from the clouds,\u8232 when in hot weather a strong wind arises,\u8232 so brazen Ares looked to Tydeus\'92 son, Diomedes,\u8232 as the god at once soared up into the clouds,\u8232 ascending to wide heaven. Ares, in a rush,\u8232 went to the gods\'92 home, steep Olympus, sat by Zeus,\u8232 distressed at heart. He showed Zeus where he\'92d been wounded, \'97[870]\u8232 dripping with immortal blood, then made his complaint.\u8232 His words had wings.\'a0 \'93Father Zeus,\u8232 aren\'92t you incensed at this barbarity?\u8232 We gods are always suffering dreadfully\u8232 at each other\'92s hands, when we bring men help.\u8232 We all lay the blame for this on you.\'a0\'a00\u8232 For you gave birth to that insane young girl,\u8232 your destructive daughter, always busy\u8232 with some nastiness. All the other gods,\u8232 all those on Mount Olympus, do what you say.\u8232 And each of us is subject to your will.\u8232 But you never punish her in word or deed.\u8232 You do nothing, because you gave birth to her\u8232 yourself, to Athena, your vicious daughter.*  \'97[880]\u8232 Just now she urged proud Diomedes,\u8232 son of Tydeus, to charge insanely0\u8232 against deathless gods. First he attacked\u8232 Aphrodite and struck her on the wrist.\u8232 Then he charged me, even me, like a god.\u8232 But my quick feet took me away. If not,\u8232 I\'92d be in lasting pain with the fearful dead,\u8232 or have barely lived, wounded by bronze spears.\'94\
Scowling at him, cloud-gatherer Zeus replied:\
\'93You hypocrite, don\'92t sit there whining at me.\uc0\u8232 Among the gods who live on Mount Olympus, \'97[890]\u8232 you\'92re the one I hate the most. For you love war,\'a0\'a00\u8232 constant strife and battle. Your mother, Hera,\u8232 has an implacable, unyielding spirit.\u8232 It\'92s hard for me to control how she reacts\u8232 to what I say. You\'92re suffering because of her,\u8232 through her conniving, that\'92s what I think.\u8232 But I\'92ll leave you in pain no longer.\u8232 You\'92re my child\'97your mother and I made you.\u8232 But if you\'92d been born from any other god,\u8232 by now you\'92d be lower than the sons\u8232 of Ouranos\'97you\'92re so destructive.\'940\
Zeus spoke. He instructed Pae\'ebon to heal Ares.\uc0\u8232 Pae\'ebon cured him by spreading pain-killing herbs,  \'97[900]\u8232 for Ares wasn\'92t born to die. Just as fig juice\u8232 added quickly to white milk clots it at once,\u8232 as it\'92s stirred, that\'92s how fast headstrong Ares healed.\u8232 Hebe washed him and clothed him in fine garments.\u8232 He sat beside Zeus, son of Cronos, enjoying his splendour.\
Athena of Alalcomenae and Argive Hera\uc0\u8232 returned once more to mighty Zeus\'92 house,\u8232 now they\'92d stopped man-killing Ares\'92 slaughter.\
}