{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf460
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural\qc

\f0\fs24 \cf0 BOOK EIGHT\
Odysseus is Entertained in Phaeacia\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural
\cf0           \
[Odysseus goes to the Phaeacian assembly; Alcinous outlines a proposal to assist Odysseus; men prepare a boat for Odysseus; Demodocus sings of an old quarrel between Odysseus and Achilles; Odysseus weeps at the banquet; the young men invite Odysseus to an athletic competition, but he declines; Euryalus insults Odysseus; Odysseus responds; Athena encourages him; Alcinous arranges a display of Phaeacian dancing; Demodocus sings of how Hephaestus caught Ares and Aphrodite in an affair; Alcinous proposes gifts for Odysseus; Euryalus apologizes; Arete gives Odysseus a gift; Nausicaa and Odysseus exchange farewells; Demodocus sings the story of the wooden horse at Troy; Odysseus weeps; Alcinous asks him to reveal his identity.]\
          \
          As soon as rose-fingered early Dawn appeared,\
          royal and mighty Alcinous rose from his bed,\
          and divinely born Odysseus, sacker of cities,\
          got up, too. Alcinous, a powerful king, led them\
          to the place Phaeacians organized assemblies,\
          ground laid out for them beside the ships. They moved there\
          and sat down on polished stones arranged in rows.\
          Pallas Athena roamed throughout the city,\
          looking like one of wise Alcinous\'92 heralds\
 [10]  and planning brave Odysseus\'92 journey home.                                                        \
          To every noble she approached she spoke these words:                                               \
          \
          \'93Come now, Phaeacian counsellor and leader,\
          come to the assembly to inform yourself\
          about the stranger who has just arrived\
          at the palace of our wise Alcinous.\
          He\'92s been wandering on the sea, but in form\
          he looks like one of the immortals.\'94\
          \
          With such words she roused the heart and spirit in each man,\
          and so the seats in the assembly filled up quickly,\
 [20]  as people gathered there. Many of those present                             \
          were astonished when they saw Laertes\'92 clever son\'97\
          Athena had poured an amazing poise on him\
          across his shoulders and his head and made him look\
          taller and more powerful, so the Phaeacians                                                                            \
          would welcome him and he would win from them\
          respect and awe\'97and prevail in competition,\
          the many rival contests where Phaeacians\
          would be testing lord Odysseus. When the men\
          had all assembled for the meeting there,\
          Alcinous spoke to them and said:\
          \
 [30]  \'93Listen to me,                                     \
          you Phaeacian counsellors and leaders.\
          I\'92ll tell you what the heart in my chest says.\
          This stranger here, a man I do not know,\
          a wanderer, has travelled to my house,\
          from people in the east or from the west.\
          He\'92s asking to be sent away back home                                                                            \
          and has requested confirmation from us.\
          So let us act as we have done before\
          and assist him with his journey. No man\
 [40]  arriving at my palace stays there long                                       \
          grieving because he cannot get back home.\
          Let\'92s drag a black ship down into the sea\
          for her first voyage. Then from the citizens\
          choose fifty-two young men who in the past\
          have shown they are the best. Once they\'92ve all lashed\
          the oars firmly in place, they\'92ll come ashore,\
          go to my house, and quickly make a meal.\
          I will provide enough for everyone.\
          That\'92s what I\'92m ordering for our young men.                                                             \
 [50]  But all you other sceptre-bearing kings                                     \
          should come to my fine home, so in those halls\
          we can make the stranger welcome. No man\
          should deny me this. And then summon there\
          the godlike minstrel Demodocus, the man\
          who has received from god the gift of song\
          above all others. He can entertain us\
          with any song his heart prompts him to sing.\'94\
          \
          Alcinous spoke and led them off. The sceptred kings\
          came after him, while a herald went to find\
 [60]  the godlike singer. Fifty-two hand-picked young men                     \
          went off, as Alcinous had ordered, to the shore\
          beside the restless sea. Once they reached the boat,                                                         \
          they dragged the black ship into deeper water,\
          set the mast and sails in place inside the vessel,\
          lashed the rowing oars onto their leather pivots,\
          then hoisted the white sail. Next, they moored the ship\
          well out to sea and then returned to the great home\
          of their wise king. Halls, corridors, and courtyards\
          were full of people gathering\'97a massive crowd,\
 [70]  young and old. On their behalf Alcinous slaughtered                       \
          eight white-tusked boars, two shambling oxen, and twelve sheep.                    \
          These carcasses they skinned and dressed and then prepared\
          a splendid banquet. Meanwhile the herald was returning\
          with the loyal singer, a man the Muse so loved\
          above all others. She\'92d given him both bad and good,\
          for she\'92d destroyed his eyes but had bestowed on him\
          the gift of pleasing song. The herald, Pontonous,\
          then brought up a silver-studded chair for him.\
          He set its back against a lofty pillar in their midst,\
 [80]  hung the clear-toned lyre on a peg above his head,                                          \
          then showed him how to reach it with his hands.\
          The herald placed a lovely table at his side,\
          with food in a basket and a cup of wine to drink,\
          when his heart felt the urge. Then all those present                                                          \
          reached for the splendid dinner set in front of them.\
          Once they\'92d enjoyed their heart\'92s fill of food and drink,\
          the minstrel was inspired by the Muse to sing\
          a song about the glorious deeds of warriors,\
          that tale, whose fame had climbed to spacious heaven,\
 [90]  about Odysseus and Achilles, son of Peleus,                                                             \
          when, at a lavish feast in honour of the gods,\
          they\'92d fought each other in ferocious argument.1\
          Still, in his heart Agamemnon, king of men,\
          had been glad to see the finest of Achaeans\
          quarrelling, for that\'92s what he\'92d been told would happen,\
          when he\'92d crossed the stone threshold in sacred Pytho                                                 \
          to consult Phoebus Apollo in his oracle\
          and the god had answered him with this reply\'97\
          that from this point on, disasters would begin                                       \
[100] for Trojans and Danaans, as great Zeus willed.                                                      \
          This was the song the celebrated minstrel sang.\
          \
          Odysseus\'92s strong hands took his long purple cloak,\
          pulled it above his head, and hid his handsome face.\
          He felt ashamed to let Phaeacians look at him\
          with tears streaming from his eyes. So every time\
          the godlike minstrel stopped the song, Odysseus\
          would wipe away the tears, take his two-handled cup,\
          and pour out a libation to the gods. But then,\
          when Demodocus started up again, urged to sing\
[110] by Phaeacian noblemen enjoying his song,                                                                         \
          Odysseus would hide his head once more and groan.\
          He concealed the tears he shed from all those present,\
          except Alcinous, the only one who noticed,\
          since he sat beside him and heard his heavy sighs.\
          So Alcinous quickly spoke to the Phaeacians,\
          men who love the sea:\
          \
          \'93Listen to me,\
          you counsellors and leaders of Phaeacians.\
          Now we have refreshed our spirits. We\'92ve shared\
          this food, and music has accompanied\
[120] our splendid banquet. So let\'92s go outside                                            \
          and test ourselves in all sorts of contests,\
          then this stranger, once he gets back home,\
          can tell his friends how much we surpass\
          all other men at wrestling and boxing,\
          at jumping and at running.\'94\
          \
          Once he\'92d said this,\
          Alcinous led them out, and they followed him.\
          The herald hung the clear-toned lyre on the peg,\
          took Demodocus by the hand, and led him out,\
          taking him along the very path other men,\
[130] Phaeacia\'92s best, had walked along to watch the games.                                 \
          So they made their way to the assembly ground.\
          A large crowd in their thousands followed them.\
          Many fine young men came forward to compete\'97                                                          \
          Acroneus, Ocyalus, and Elatreus,\
          then Nauteus, Prymneus, and Anchialus,\
          Eretmeus, too, along with Ponteus,\
          Proreus, Tho\'f6n, and Anabesineus,\
          with Amphialus, son of Polyneus,\
          son of Tecton. Euryalus came up, as well,\
[140] a match for man-destroying Ares, god of war,                                                        \
          son of Naubolus. His handsome looks and shape\
          made him, after Laodamas, who had no equal,\
          the finest of Phaeacians. Three sons of Alcinous\
          stepped out, as well\'97Halius, Laodomas,\
          and godlike Clytoneus. In the first contest                                                                                 \
          these men competed in the foot race on a course\
          laid out for them with markers. They all sprinted off,\
          moving quickly. A cloud of dust rose from the ground.\
          Clytoneus was by far the finest runner,\
[150] so he raced ahead and got back to the crowd,                                                         \
          leaving the others well behind, about as far\
          as the furrow laid down by a team of mules\
          in ploughing fallow land.2 Then the competitors\
          tested their skill in the painful sport of wrestling,\
          and of all the noble princes Euryalus\
          proved himself the best. Next, in the leaping contest\
          Amphialus came out victorious, and then,\
          Elatreus triumphed in the discus throw,\
          as did Laodamas, fine son of Alcinous,                                                                                           \
[160] in the boxing match. Once they\'92d enjoyed these contests,                         \
          Laodamas, son of Alcinous, spoke to them:\
          \
          \'93Come, my friends, why don\'92t we ask the stranger\
          whether there\'92s some contest he knows all about\
          and understands. From the way his body looks\
          he\'92s no weakling\'97not in his thighs and calves,\
          his thick neck and those two strong upper arms\'97\
          lots of power there, no lack of youthful strength.\
          He\'92s just exhausted by his many troubles.\
          The sea is bad at breaking a man down,\
[170] no matter what his strength. From what I know,                                     \
          there\'92s nothing worse.\'94\
          \
          Then Euryalus                                                                               \
          answered him and said:\
          \
          \'93Laodamas,\
          what you\'92ve just said is really sensible.\
          So now go on your own and challenge him.\
          And say it so that all of us can hear.\'94\
          \
          When Alcinous\'92s fine son heard these words, he moved\
          so he was standing in the middle of the crowd,\
          and spoke out to Odysseus:\
          \
          \'93Honoured stranger,\
          come and test yourself in competition,\
[180] if there\'92s some sport in which you have great skill                    \
          It seems to me you know how to compete,\
          since there\'92s no greater glory for a man\
          than what he wins with his own hands and feet.\
          So come, make the attempt. All that sorrow\'97\
          cast it from your heart. Your journey homeward\
          will no longer be postponed. Your ship is launched,                                            \
          your comrades are all ready to set off.\'94\
          \
          Then shrewd Odysseus answered him and said:\
          \
          \'93Laodamas,\
          why do you provoke me with this challenge?\
[190] My heart\'92s preoccupied with troubles now,                                                    \
          not with competition. Up to this point,\
          I\'92ve suffered and struggled through so much,\
          and now I sit with you in this assembly\
          yearning to get home, pleading my case\
          before your king and all the people.\'94\
          \
          Euryalus then replied by taunting Odysseus\
          right to his face:\
          \
          \'93No, no, stranger. I don\'92t see you\
          as someone with much skill in competition\'97\
          not a real man, the sort one often meets\'97                                                                  \
[200] more like a sailor trading back and forth                                  \
          in a ship with many oars, a captain\
          in charge of merchant sailors, whose concern\
          is for his freight\'97he keeps a greedy eye\
          on the cargo and his profit. You don\'92t seem\
          to be an athlete.\'94\
          \
          With a scowl, Odysseus,\
          that resourceful man, then answered Euryalus:\
          \
          \'93Stranger, what you\'92ve said is not so wise,\
          like a man whose foolishness is blinding him.\
          How true it is the gods do not present\
[210] their lovely gifts to all men equally,                                                                      \
          not beauty, shape, or skill in speaking out.\
          One man\'92s appearance may not be attractive,\
          but a god will crown his words with beauty,                                                                 \
          so men rejoice to look on him\'97he speaks\
          with confidence and yet sweet modesty,\
          and thus stands out among those in assembly,\
          and when he moves throughout the city,\
          they look at him as if he were a god.\
          And yet another man can be so beautiful,\
[220] he looks like an immortal, but his words                                  \
          are empty of all grace. That\'92s how you are.\
          Your appearance is particularly handsome\'97\
          a god could hardly make that any finer\'97\
          but your mind is empty. Your rude speech\
          has stirred the spirit in my chest. For I\
          am not without skill in competition,\
          not the way you chat about. No. In fact,                                                                          \
          when I relied upon my youth and strength,\
          I think I ranked among the very best.\
[230] Now I\'92m hurt and suffering, I\'92m holding back,                                          \
          because I\'92ve gone through so much misery\
          in dealing with men\'92s wars and painful waves.\
          But still, though I have undergone so much,\
          I\'92ll test myself in these contests of yours.\
          For what you\'92ve said is gnawing at my heart\'97\
          that speech which you just made provokes me.\'94\
          \
          Odysseus finished and then, still wrapped up in his cloak,\
          picked up a hefty discus, bigger than the others,\
          much heavier than the ones used by Phaeacians\
[240] when they competed with each other. With a whirl,                                         \
          he sent it flying from his powerful hand.\
          The stone made a humming sound as it flew along,                                                         \
          and the long-oared Phaeacians, men who love their ships,\
          ducked down near the ground, below that flying stone.\
          It sailed beyond the marks of all the other men,\
          speeding lightly from his hand, and Athena,\
          in the likeness of a man, noted where it fell.\
          Then she called out to him and said:\
          \
          \'93Stranger,\
          a blind man could find your mark by groping.\
[250] It\'92s far out in front, not with the others.                                                           \
          So at least in this throwing competition\
          you can be confident. No Phaeacian\
          will get this far or throw it further.\'94\
          \
          Athena spoke, and resourceful lord Odysseus\
          was happy, glad to see someone supporting him                                                                  \
          in competition. So with a more cheerful voice\
          he said to the Phaeacians:\
          \
          \'93Equal that, you youngsters.\
          I\'92ll quickly send another after it,\
          which will go as far, I think, even further.\
[260] As for other contests, let any man                                            \
          whose heart and spirit urge him, come up here,\
          and test himself. You\'92ve made me so worked up.\
          In boxing, wrestling, or running\'97I don\'92t care.\
          Any one at all from you Phaeacians,\
          except Laodamas, for he\'92s my host.\
          And what man fights against another man\
          who shows him hospitality? Anyone                                                                                     \
          who challenges the host who welcomes him\
          in a foreign land is a worthless fool,\
[270] for he is cancelling his own good fortune.                                                      \
          But from the others I\'92ll not back away,\
          nor will I take them lightly. No. I wish\
          to see their skill and test them man to man.\
          In all the competitions men engage in,\
          I am no weakling. I well understand\
          how to use a polished bow with skill.\
          I was the first to shoot an arrow off\
          and, in a multitude of enemies,\
          to kill a man, even as companions\
[280] standing close by me were still taking aim.                                                   \
          In that Trojan land, when Achaeans shot,\
          the only one who beat me with the bow\
          was Philoctetes.3 But of all the rest                                                                                         \
          I claim I\'92m far the best\'97of mortal men,\
          I mean, ones now on earth who feed on bread.\
          For I won\'92t seek to make myself a match\
          for men of earlier times\'97for Hercules,\
          or Eurytus of Oechalia, warriors\
          who competed with the gods in archery.\
[290] That\'92s why great Eurytus was killed so young                            \
          and did not reach old age in his own home.\
          Apollo, in his anger, slaughtered him,\
          because Eurytus had challenged him\
          in a contest with their bows. With my spear,\
          I throw further than any other man\
          can shoot an arrow. But in the foot race                                                                          \
          I\'92m afraid that one of the Phaeacians\
          may outrun me, for in those many waves\
          I was badly beaten down\'97on board ship\
[300] I did not have a large supply of food,                                                                  \
          and so my legs are weak.\'94\
          \
          Odysseus finished.\
          All the people there were silent. No one spoke.\
          Then Alcinous responded to Odysseus:\
          \
          \'93Stranger, since you have not been ungracious\
          in your speech to us and wish to demonstrate\
          the merit you possess, in your anger\
          that this man came up and taunted you\
          in these games of ours, mocking your excellence\
          in a manner no one would ever do,\
[310] if in his heart he fully understood                                                      \
          how to speak correctly, come, hear me now,\
          so you can tell this to some other hero,\
          when you\'92re back in your own home and feasting\
          with your wife and children there beside you,\
          remembering our qualities, the skills\
          Zeus gave us when our ancestors were here,\
          which still endure. We have no special gift\
          in boxing fights or wrestling, but we run fast.\
          We\'92re the finest sailors, love feasts, the lyre,\
[320] dancing, new clothes, warm baths, and going to bed.                        \
          So come, all those of you among Phaeacians                                                             \
          who dance the best, perform for us, and then\
          our guest, when he gets back, can tell his friends\
          just how much we surpass all other men\
          in seamanship, speed on foot, dance, and song.\
          Let a man go and get that sweet-toned lyre\
          for Demodocus\'97it\'92s somewhere in the hall.\'94\
          \
          Godlike Alcinous finished. The herald got up\
          to fetch the hollow lyre from the royal palace.\
[330] Nine officials chosen from among the people,                                                       \
          men who organized each detail of their meetings,\
          stood up, smoothed off a dancing space, and then marked out\
          a fair and spacious circle. The herald came up,                                                                      \
          carrying the clear-toned lyre for Demodocus,\
          who then moved to the centre. Around the singer\
          stood boys in the first bloom of youth, skilled dancers,\
          whose feet then struck the consecrated dancing ground.\
          In his heart, Odysseus was amazed. He marvelled\
          at the speed with which they moved their dancing feet.\
          \
[340] The minstrel struck the opening chords to his sweet song\'97            \
          how Ares loved the fair-crowned Aphrodite,\
          how in Hephaestus\'92 house they first had sex\
          in secret, and how Ares gave her many gifts,\
          while he disgraced the bed of lord Hephaestus.4\
          But sun god Helios observed them making love                                                                   \
          and came at once to tell Hephaestus. Once he heard\
          the unwelcome news, Hephaestus went into his forge,\
          pondering some nasty scheme deep in his heart.\
          He set up his massive anvil on its block,\
[350] then forged a net no one could break or loosen,                                                 \
          so they\'92d have to stay immobile where they were.\
          When, in his rage, he had made that snare for Ares,\
          he went into the room which housed his marriage bed,\
          anchored the netting all around the bed posts,\
          and then hung loops of it from roof beams high above,\
          fine as spiders\'92 webs, impossible to see,                                                                                         \
          even for a blessed god\'97that\'92s how skillfully\
          he made that net. Once he\'92d organized the snare\
          around the bed, he announced a trip to Lemnos,\
[360] that well-built citadel, his favourite place by far                               \
          of all the lands on earth. Ares of the Golden Reins,\
          who maintained a constant watch, saw Hephaestus,\
          the celebrated master artisan, leaving home,\
          and went running over to Hephaestus\'92 house,\
          eager to have sex with fair-crowned Aphrodite.\
          She had just left the presence of her father Zeus,\
          mighty son of Cronos, and was sitting down.\
          Ares charged inside the house, clutched her hand, then spoke,                             \
          saying these words to her:\
          \
          \'93Come, my love,\
[370] let\'92s get into bed\'97make love together.                                                             \
          Hephaestus is not home. No doubt he\'92s gone\
          to visit Lemnos and the Sintians,\
          those men who speak like such barbarians.\'945\
          \
          Ares spoke. To Aphrodite having sex with him\
          seemed quite delightful. So they went off to bed\
          and lay down there together. But then the crafty net\
          made by Hephaestus\'92 ingenuity fell round them,\
          so they could not move their limbs or lift their bodies.\
          After a while, they realized they could not get out.\
[380] Then the famous crippled god came back to them\'97                               \
          he turned round before he reached the land of Lemnos.\
          Helios had stayed on watch and gave him a report.\
          With a grieving heart, Hephaestus went up to his home,\
          stood at the front door, where a cruel anger gripped him.\
          He made a dreadful cry, calling out to all the gods:\
          \
          \'93Father Zeus, all you other sacred gods\
          who live forever, come here, so you can see\
          something disgusting and ridiculous\'97\
          Aphrodite, Zeus\'92s daughter, scorns me\
[390] and lusts after Ares, the destroyer,                                                                         \
          because he\'92s beautiful, with healthy limbs,                                                                     \
          while I was born deformed. I\'92m not to blame.\
          My parents are! I wish they\'92d never borne me!\
          See how these two have gone to my own bed\
          and are lying there, having sex together,\
          while I look on in pain. But I don\'92t think\
          they want to stay lying down like this for long,\
          no matter how much they may be in love.\
          They\'92ll both soon lose the urge to stay in bed.\
[400] But this binding snare will confine them here,                                          \
          until her father gives back all those presents,\
          courting gifts I gave him for that shameless bitch\'97\
          a lovely daughter but a sex-crazed wife.\'946                                                                       \
          \
          Hephaestus finished. Gods gathered at the bronze-floored house.\
          Earthshaker Poseidon came, and Hermes, too,\
          the god of luck. And archer lord Apollo came.\
          But female goddesses were all far too ashamed\
          and stayed at home. So the gods, givers of good things,\
          stood in the doorway, looking at the artful work\
[410] of ingenious Hephaestus. They began to laugh\'97                             \
          an irrepressible laughter then pealed out\
          among the blessed gods. Glancing at his neighbour,\
          one of them would say:\
          \
          \'93Bad deeds don\'92t pay.\
          The slow one overtakes the swift\'97just as\
          Hephaestus, slow as he is, has caught Ares,                                                                   \
          although of all the gods who hold Olympus\
          he\'92s the fastest one there is. Yes, he\'92s lame,\
          but he\'92s a crafty one. So Ares now\
          must pay a fine for his adultery.\'94\
          \
[420] That\'92s how the gods then talked to one another.                                                  \
          \
          But lord Apollo, son of Zeus, questioned Hermes:\
          \
          \'93Hermes, son of Zeus, you messenger\
          and giver of good things, how would you like\
          to lie in bed by golden Aphrodite,\
          even though a strong net tied you down?\'94\
          \
          The messenger god, killer of Argus, then said\
          in his reply:\
          \
          \'93Far-shooting lord Apollo,\
          I wish there were three times as many nets,                                                                 \
          impossible to break, and all you gods\
[430] were looking on, if I could like down there,                                                 \
          alongside golden Aphrodite.\'94\
          \
          At Hermes\'92 words,\
          laughter arose from the immortal deities.\
          But Poseidon did not laugh. He kept requesting\
          Hephaestus, the celebrated master artisan,\
          to set Ares free. When he talked to him,\
          his words had wings:\
          \
          \'93Set him loose.\
          I promise he will pay you everything,\
          as you are asking, all he truly owes,\
          in the presence of immortal gods.\'94\
          \
          The famous lame god then replied:\
          \
[440] \'93Poseidon,                                            \
          Shaker of the Earth, do not ask me this.                                                                           \
          It\'92s a nasty thing to accept a pledge\
          made for a nasty rogue. What if Ares\
          escapes his chains, avoids the debt, and leaves\'97\
          how then among all these immortal gods\
          do I hold you in chains?\'94\
          \
          Earthshaker Poseidon\
          then answered him and said:\
          \
          \'93Hephaestus,\
          if indeed Ares does not discharge his debt\
          and runs away, I\'92ll pay you in person.\'94\
          \
[450] Then the celebrated crippled god replied:                                                                   \
          \
          \'93It would be inappropriate for me\
          to refuse to take your word.\'94\
          \
          After saying this,\
          powerful Hephaestus then untied the netting.                                                                        \
          Once they\'92d been released from their strong chains, both gods\
          jumped up immediately\'97Ares went off to Thrace,\
          and laughter-loving Aphrodite left for Paphos,\
          in Cyprus, where she has her sanctuary, her sacred altar.\
          There the Graces bathed and then anointed her\
          with heavenly oil, the sort that gleams upon the gods,\
[460] who live forever. Next, they took some gorgeous clothes                 \
          and dressed her\'97the sight was marvellous to see.\
          \
          That was the song the famous minstrel sang.\
          As he listened, Odysseus felt joy in his heart\'97\
          long-oared Phaeacians, famous sailors, felt it, too.\
          Alcinous then asked Laodamas and Halius                                                                                 \
          to dance alone. No man could match their dancing skill.\
          The two men picked up a lovely purple ball,\
          which clever Polybus had made for them.\
          Then, leaning back, one of them would throw it high,\
[470] towards the shadowy clouds, and then the other,                                                \
          before his feet touched ground, would catch it easily.\
          Once they had shown their skill in tossing it straight up,\
          they threw it back and forth, as they kept dancing\
          on the life-sustaining earth, while more young men\
          stood at the edge of the arena, beating time.\
          The dancing rhythms made a powerful sound.                                                                       \
          Then lord Odysseus spoke:\
          \
          \'93Mighty Alcinous,\
          most renowned among all men, you claimed\
          your dancers were the best, and now, indeed,\
[480] what you said is true. When I gaze at them,                                                 \
          I\'92m lost in wonder.\'94\
          \
          At Odysseus\'92 words,\
          powerful king Alcinous felt a great delight,\
          and spoke at once to his Phaeacians, master sailors.\
          \
          \'93Leaders and counsellors of the Phaeacians,\
          listen\'97this stranger seems to me a man\
          with an uncommon wisdom. So come now,\
          let\'92s give him gifts of friendship, as is right.\
          Twelve distinguished kings are rulers here                                                                     \
          and govern in this land, and I myself\
[490] am the thirteenth king. Let each one of you                             \
          bring a fresh cloak and tunic, newly washed,\
          and a talent of pure gold. All of this\
          we should put together very quickly,\
          so this stranger has his gifts in hand\
          and goes to dinner with a joyful heart.\
          Euryalus must apologize in person\
          to the stranger, verbally and with a gift,\
          for what he said is not acceptable.\'94\
          \
          Alcinous spoke. All those present agreed with him\
[500] and said it should be done. Then every one of them                        \
          sent an attendant out to bring back presents.\
          And Euryalus addressed the king and said:                                                                                 \
          \
          \'93Lord Alcinous, most renowned among all men,\
          to this stranger I will indeed apologize,\
          as you instruct me. And I\'92ll give him\
          a sword completely made of bronze,\
          with a silver hilt, and scabbard, too,\
          of fresh-carved ivory which fits around it,\
          a gift worth a great deal, and just for him.\'94\
          \
[510] With these words he set into Odysseus\'92 hands                                  \
          the silver-studded sword and then addressed him\'97\
          his words had wings:\
          \
          \'93Greetings, honoured stranger.\
          If any harsh word has been spoken here,\
          let storm winds snatch it, carry it away.\
          As for you, may gods grant you see your wife\
          and reach your native land. You\'92ve suffered much,                                              \
          for such a long time distant from your friends.\'94\
          \
          Then Odysseus, that resourceful man, replied and said:\
          \
          \'93And you, my friend, best wishes to you, too.\
[520] May gods give you joyful prosperity.                                                                    \
          And may you never miss this sword\
          which you are giving me. These words of yours\
          have made amends to me.\'94\
          \
          Odysseus spoke\
          and slung the silver-studded sword around his shoulders.\
          As the sun went down, splendid presents were brought in,\
          carried to Alcinous\'92 home by worthy heralds.\
          The sons of noble Alcinous took the lovely gifts                                                                   \
          and set them down before their honoured mother.\
          With powerful king Alcinous leading them,\
[530] they came in and sat down on their upraised thrones.                                   \
          Mighty Alcinous then said to Arete:\
          \
          \'93My lady, have a precious trunk brought here,\
          the best there is. You yourself should place in it\
          a tunic and a freshly laundered cloak.\
          Then heat a cauldron for him on the fire,\
          warm up some water, so he can bathe,\
          and, after he\'92s seen safely stowed away\
          all the splendid gifts Phaeacian noblemen\
          have brought in here, he can enjoy the feast,\
[540] while listening to the minstrel\'92s singing.                                                          \
          And I will give him this fine cup of mine\'97                                                                   \
          it\'92s made of gold\'97for all his days to come\
          he will remember me, as he pours libations\
          in his halls to Zeus and other gods.\'94\
          \
          Alcinous finished. Arete then told her servants\
          to set a large cauldron full of water on the fire\
          as quickly as they could. They placed it on the fire,\
          poured water in it, and added wood below.\
          So flames then licked the belly of the cauldron,\
[550] heating up the water. Meanwhile for her guest                                 \
          Arete had brought out from her inner rooms\
          a splendid chest, which she filled with precious gifts,\
          the clothing and the gold brought by Phaeacians.                                                               \
          She herself added a cloak and lovely tunic.\
          Then she addressed Odysseus\'97her words had wings:\
          \
          \'93You must attend to the lid yourself,\
          and secure it quickly with a knot,\
          so no one robs you on your journey,\
          perhaps when you are lost in a sweet sleep\
[560] sometime later, as your black ship sails on.\'94                                                \
          \
          Long-suffering lord Odysseus heard what she advised.\
          He quickly shut the lid and bound it with a knot,\
          a tricky one which he\'92d learned from queenly Circe.\
          Then the housekeeper invited him to step\
          into the bathing tub. His heart was filled with joy                                                               \
          to see hot water\'97he\'92d not had such welcome care\
          since the day he had left fair-haired Calypso\'92s home.\
          Till then he had been treated always like a god.\
          The servant women washed him, rubbed him down with oil,\
[570] and dressed him in a handsome cloak and tunic.                                                \
          He left his bath and went to drink wine with the men.\
          Nausicaa, whose beauty was a gift from god,\
          standing by the doorway of that well-built hall,\
          looked at Odysseus and was filled with wonder.\
          She spoke winged words to him:                                                                                                           \
          \
          \'93Farewell, stranger.\
          When you are back in your own land,\
          I hope you will remember me sometimes,\
          since you owe your life to me.\'94\
          \
          Then Odysseus,\
          that resourceful man, replied to her and said:\
          \
[580] \'93Nausicaa, daughter of great Alcinous,                                                          \
          may Hera\'92s loud-thundering husband, Zeus,\
          grant that I see the day of my return\
          when I get home. There I will pray to you\
          all my days, as to a god. For you, girl,\
          you gave me my life.\'94\
          \
          Odysseus finished speaking.\
          Then he sat down on a chair beside king Alcinous.\
          They were already serving food and mixing wine.                                                              \
          A herald approached leading the faithful singer,\
          Demodocus, whom the people held in honour,\
[590] and sat him in the middle of the banquet,                                                                  \
          leaning his chair against a lofty pillar.\
          Then shrewd Odysseus, as he was slicing meat\
          from the large amount remaining, took pieces\
          from the back cut of a white-tusked boar, lots of fat\
          on either side, and called out to the herald:\
          \
          \'93Herald, take this portion of our food\
          to Demodocus, so that he can eat.\
          Though in grief, I\'92ll give him a warm welcome,\
          for from all people living on the earth\
[600] singers win honour and respect. The Muse                                       \
          has taught them song and loves their tribe.\'94\
          \
          At Odysseus\'92 words, the herald took the serving\
          and handed it to noble Demodocus,\
          who accepted it with a delighted heart. \
          Their hands reached out to take the tasty food\
          prepared and set out there before them. And then,\
          when they\'92d had their heart\'92s fill of food and drink,\
          quick-witted Odysseus said to Demodocus:\
          \
          \'93Demodocus, to you I give high praise,\
[610] more so than to all other mortal men,                                                               \
          whether it was that child of Zeus, the Muse,\
          who taught you, or Apollo. For you sing\
          so well and with such true expressiveness\
          about the destiny of the Achaeans,\
          everything they did and suffered, the work                                                                   \
          they had to do\'97as if you yourself were there\
          or heard the story from a man who was.\
          Come, change the subject now, and sing about\
          the building of that wooden horse, the one\
[620] Epeius made with guidance from Athena.                                                       \
          Lord Odysseus then, with his trickery,\
          had it brought to the citadel, filled with men,\
          those who ransacked Troy. If, at my request,\
          you will recite the details of this story,\
          I\'92ll tell all men how, of his own free will,\
          god gives poetic power to your song.\'94\
          \
          Odysseus spoke. And the minstrel, inspired by god,\
          began to sing to them, taking up the story                                                                                 \
          at the point where Argives, having burned their huts\
[630] and gone on board their well-oared ships, were sailing off,                      \
          while those warriors led by glorious Odysseus\
          were at Troy\'92s meeting ground, hidden in the horse.7\
          Trojans had dragged the horse all by themselves\
          inside their citadel. It stood there, while Trojans\
          sat and talked around it, confused what they should do.\
          There were three different options people favoured\'97\
          to split the hollow wood apart with pitiless bronze,\
          or drag it to the heights and throw it from the rocks,\
          or let it stay there as a great offering to the gods,\
[640] something to assuage their anger. And that, indeed,                                                \
          is what they finally did, for it was their fate\
          to be wiped out once they had within their city walls\
          a gigantic wooden horse in which lay hidden\
          all the finest Argives, bringing into Troy\
          death and destruction. Then Demodocus sang\
          how Achaea\'92s sons left their hollow hiding place,\
          poured from the horse, and then destroyed the city.\
          He sang about the various ways those warriors\
          laid waste that lofty city and how Odysseus,\
[650] like Ares, god of war, and godlike Menelaus                                    \
          went to the home of De\'efphobus, where, he said,\
          Odysseus battled in the most horrendous fight,\
          from which he then emerged at last victorious,\
          thanks to assistance from Athena\'92s mighty heart.                                                                \
          \
          That was the tale the celebrated minstrel sang.\
          Odysseus was moved to weep\'97below his eyes\
          his face grew wet with tears. Just as a woman cries,\
          when she prostrates herself on her dear husband\
          who has just been killed in front of his own city\
[660] and his people, trying to save his children                                        \
          and the citizens from the day they meet their doom\'97\
          as he dies, she sees him gasping his last breath,\
          embraces him, and screams out her laments,\
          while at her back her enemies keep beating her,\
          with spears across her spine and shoulders,\
          then lead her off, cheeks ravaged by her grief,                                                                       \
          into a life of bondage, misery, and pain\'97\
          that\'92s how Odysseus let tears of pity fall\
          from his eyes then. But he concealed those tears\
[670] from all of them except Alcinous, who,                                                                          \
          as he sat there beside him, was the only one\
          who noticed and could hear his heavy sighs.\
          So he spoke out at once, addressing his Phaeacians,\
          lovers of the sea.\
          \
          \'93Listen to me,\
          you Phaeacian counsellors and leaders.\
          Let Demodocus cease from playing now\
          his clear-toned lyre, for the song he sings\
          does not please all his listeners alike.\
          Since our godlike minstrel was first moved to sing,\
[680] as we were dining, our guest has been in pain,                                                 \
          his mournful sighs have never stopped. His heart,\
          I think, must surely overflow with grief.\
          Then let our singer end his song, so all of us,\
          both hosts and guest, can enjoy our feasting.\
          Things will be much better. We\'92ve done all this\'97\
          the farewell dinner and the friendship gifts,\
          offered up with love\'97in honour of our guest.\
          To any man with some intelligence,\
          a stranger coming as a suppliant\
[690] brings the same delight a brother does.                                                             \
          And you, our guest, should no longer hide\
          behind those cunning thoughts of yours and skirt\
          the things I ask you. It\'92s better to be frank.\
          Tell me your name, what they call you at home\'97                                                 \
          your mother and your father and the others,\
          those in the town and in the countryside.\
          There\'92s no one in the world, mean or noble,\
          who goes without a name once he\'92s been born.\
          Parents give one to each of us at birth.\
[700] Tell me your country and your people,                                                             \
          your city, too, so ships can take you there,\
          using what they know to chart their passage.\
          Phaeacians have no pilots, no steering oar,\
          like other boats, for their ships on their own\
          can read men\'92s hearts and thoughts\'97they know\
          all men\'92s cities, their rich estates, as well,                                                                       \
          and quickly skim across wide tracts of sea,\
          concealed in mist and clouds, without a fear\
          of shipwrecks or disaster. Still, my father,\
[710] Nausithous, once told me this story\'97                                       \
          he used to say we made Poseidon angry\
          because we carried everyone in safety.\
          He claimed that one day, as a well-built ship\
          with a Phaeacian crew was sailing back\
          from such a trip, over the misty sea,\
          Poseidon would destroy it and then place\
          a massive ring of mountains round our city.\
          That\'92s what the old man said. It\'92s up to god                                                                  \
          to make that happen or leave it undone,\
[720] whatever he finds pleasing to his heart.                                                            \
          So come, tell me this, and speak the truth\'97\
          Where have you travelled in your wanderings?\
          What men\'92s countries have you visited?\
          Tell me of people and their well-built towns,\
          whether they are cruel, unjust, and savage,\
          or welcome strangers and fear god in their hearts.\
          Tell us why you weep, your heart full of pain,\
          to hear the fate of Argives and Danaans,\
          and of Troy. Gods made these things happen.\
[730] They spun out that destructive thread for men,                                        \
          to weave a song for those as yet unborn.                                                                         \
          Was someone in your family killed at Troy\'97\
          a good and loyal man, a son-in-law,\
          your wife\'92s father, one of those we truly love\
          after our flesh and blood? A companion?\
          A fine and worthy man dear to your heart?\
          For a companion who\'92s a heart\'92s true friend\
          is every bit as dear as one\'92s own brother.\'94}