{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf460
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural\qc

\f0\fs24 \cf0 BOOK TEN\
AEOLUS, THE LAESTRYGONIANS, AND CIRCE\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural
\cf0           \
[Odysseus continues his narrative: he and his ships reach Aeolia, home of Aeolus, god of the winds; Aeolus welcomes them and gives Odysseus a bag with all the winds tied up inside it; Odysseus sails from Aeolia, but his men open the bag, bringing on a storm which drives them back to Aeolia; Aeolus refuses Odysseus\'92 request for further help and orders him off the island; Odysseus and his men reach the land of the Laestrygonians, who attack them and destroy all the ships except Odysseus\'92 vessel; that one ship sails to the island of Aeaea, land of Circe; Odysseus kills a stag for a meal; half the men go to Circe\'92s house and are changed into pigs; Eurylochus brings the news to Odysseus; Odysseus meets Hermes, who gives him an antidote to Circe\'92s spells; Circe tries to bewitch Odysseus and fails; they go to bed together; Circe changes the men back to human beings; they stay there one year, and then sail on, heading for Hades\'92 home.]\
           \
          \'93Next we reached Aeolia, a floating island,\
          where Aeolus lived, son of Hippotas,\
          whom immortal gods hold dear.1 Around it,\
          runs an impenetrable wall of bronze,\
          and cliffs rise up in a sheer face of rock.\
          His twelve children live there in the palace,\
          six daughters as well as six full-grown sons.\
          He gave the daughters to the sons in marriage,\
          and they are always at a banquet feasting,\
[10] beside their dear father and good mother,                                                     \
          with an infinite supply of tasty food\
          set out before them. The smells of cooking                                                                  \
          fill the house all day. The courtyard echoes\
          to the sounds of celebration. At night,\
          they go to sleep beside their faithful wives,\
          on coverlets and beds well strung with cord.2\
          \
          \'93We reached the splendid palace in the city,\
          and for one whole month he entertained me,\
          always asking questions about everything\'97\
[20] Troy, Argive ships, how Achaeans made it home\'97                  \
          and I told him all from start to finish.\
          When, for my part, I asked to take my leave\
          and told him he should send me on my way,\
          he denied me nothing and helped me go.\
          He gave me a bag made out of ox-hide,\
          flayed from a creature nine years old,\
          and tied up in it all the winds that blow                                                                            \
          from every quarter, for Cronos\'92 son\
          has made Aeolus keeper of the winds,\
[30] and he could calm or rouse them, as he wished.                                      \
          With a shining silver cord he lashed that bag \
          inside my hollow ship, so as to stop\
          even the smallest breath from getting out.\
          He also got a West Wind breeze to blow\
          to carry ships and men on their way home.\
          But that\'92s not how things happened to turn out\'97\
          we ruined everything with our own folly.\
          \
          \'93For nine whole days and nights we held our course,\
          and on the tenth we glimpsed our native land.\
[40] We came in so close we could see the men                                         \
          who tend the beacon fires.3 But then sweet Sleep\
          came over me\'97I was too worn out.\
          All that time my hands had gripped the sail rope\'97\
          I\'92d not let go of it or passed it on\
          to any shipmate, so that we\'92d get home\
          more quickly. But as I slept, my comrades\
          started talking to each other, claiming\
          I was taking gold and silver back with me,\
          gifts of Aeolus, brave son of Hippotas.\
[50] Glancing at the man who sat beside him,                                                        \
          one of them would say something like this:\
          \
          \'91It\'92s not fair. Everyone adores this man\
          and honours him, no matter where he goes,\
          to any city, any land. From Troy\
          he\'92s taking a huge stash of glorious loot\'97                                                  \
          but those of us who\'92ve been on the same trip\
          are coming home with empty hands. And now,\
          Aeolus, because he\'92s a friend of his,\
          has freely given him these presents.\
[60] Come on, let\'92s see how much gold and silver                   \
          he has in this bag.\'92\
          \
          \'93As they talked like this,\
          my companions\'92 greedy thoughts prevailed.\
          They untied the bag. All the winds rushed out\'97\
          storms winds seized them, swept them out to sea,\
          in tears, away from their own native land.\
          At that point I woke up. Deep in my heart                                                                    \
          I was of two minds\'97I could jump overboard\
          and drown at sea or just keep going in silence,\
          remain among the living. I stayed there\
[70] and suffered on. Covering up my head,                                    \
          I lay down on the deck, while our ships,\
          loaded with my whimpering companions,\
          were driven by those wicked blasts of wind\
          all the way back to Aeolus\'92 island.\
          \
          \'93We went ashore there and brought back water.\
          My crew had a quick meal beside the ships.\
          After we\'92d had something to eat and drink,\
          I set off for Aeolus\'92 splendid palace, \
          taking with me one comrade and a herald.\
[80] I found him feasting with his wife and children.                                 \
          So we went into the house and sat down \
          on the threshold, right beside the door posts.\
          In their hearts they were amazed. They asked me\
          \
          \'91Odysseus, how is it you\'92ve come back here?\
          What cruel god has been attacking you?\
          We took great care to send you on your way\
          so you\'92d get home, back to your native land\
          or any other place, just as you wished.\'92\
          \
          \'93That\'92s what they asked. With a heavy heart,\
          I answered them:\
          \
  [90] \'91My foolish comrades,                                                                                                                                                \
          aided by malicious Sleep, have injured me.\
          But, my friends, you can repair all this\'97\
          that\'92s in your power.\'92\
          \
          \'93I said these words                                                \
          to reassure them. But they stayed silent.\
          Then their father gave me this reply:\
          \
          \'91Of all living men, you are the worst\'97\
          so you must leave this island with all speed.\
          It would violate all sense of what is right\
          if I assisted or escorted on his way\
[100] a man the blessed gods must hate. So leave.                       \
          You\'92re here because deathless gods despise you.\'92\
          \
          \'93Once he\'92d said this, he sent me from his house,\
          for all my heavy groans. Then, sick at heart,\
          we sailed on further, my crewmen\'92s spirits\
          worn down by the weary work of rowing.\
          Because we\'92d been such fools, there was no breeze\
          to help us on our way. We went on like this\
          for six whole days and nights. On the seventh                                                           \
          we came to Telepylus, great citadel\
[110] of Lamus, king of Laestrygonians,                                                                          \
          where the herdsman driving in his flock\
          salutes the herdsman moving his beasts out.4\
          There a man who had no need of sleep\
          could earn two wages\'97one for tending cattle,\
          one for grazing sheep. Day and night-time trails\
          lie close together.5 We came up there,\
          into a lovely harbour, with a sheer cliff\
          around it on both sides. Jutting headlands\
          facing one another extended out\
[120] beyond the harbour mouth, a narrow entrance.                                           \
          All my shipmates brought their curved ships up\
          and moored them inside the hollow harbour\
          in a tightly clustered group\'97in that spot\
          there were never any waves, large or small.\
          Everything was calm and bright around them.\
          But I moored my black ship all by itself\
          outside the harbour, right against the land,\
          tying it to the rock. I clambered up the cliff\
          and stood there, on a rugged outcrop,\
[130] looking round. I could see no evidence                                    \
          of human work or ploughing, only smoke\
          arising from the land. I sent some comrades out                                                    \
          to learn what the inhabitants were like,\
          the men who ate the food this land produced.\
          I chose two men, with a third as herald.\
          They left the ships and came to a smooth road,\
          which wagons used to haul wood to the town\
          from high mountain slopes. Outside the city\
          they met a young girl collecting water, \
[140] the noble daughter of Antiphates,                                                                           \
          a Laestrygonian. She\'92d come down there\
          to the fine flowing spring Artacia,\
          where the townsfolk went to draw their water.\
          The men walked up and spoke to her. They asked\
          who ruled the people here and who they were.                                                        \
          She quickly pointed out her father\'92s lofty home.\
          They reached the splendid house and found his wife,\
          a gigantic woman, like a mountain peak.\
          They were appalled. She called her husband,\
[150] strong Antiphates, out of a meeting,                                                                    \
          and he arranged a dreadful death for them\'97              \
          he seized one of my shipmates and prepared\
          to make a meal of him. The other two\
          jumped up, ran off, and came back to the ships.\
          Antiphates then raised a hue and cry\
          throughout the city. Once they heard his call,\
          the powerful Laestrygonians poured out,\
          thronging in countless numbers from all sides\'97\
          not like men at all, but Giants. From the cliffs                                                         \
[160] they hurled rocks down on us, the largest stones                      \
          a man can lift. The clamour rising from the ships\
          was dreadful\'97men were being destroyed,\
          ships were smashing into one another,\
          with those monsters spearing men like fish,\
          and taking them to eat a gruesome meal.\
          While they were slaughtering the sailors there,\
          trapped in the deep harbour, I grabbed my sword,\
          pulled it from my thigh, and cut the cables\
          on my dark-prowed ship, yelling to my crew,\
[170] ordering them to put their oars to work,                                                          \
          so we could get away from this disaster.\
          They all churned the water with their oar-blades,                                                  \
          terrified of being killed. We were relieved,\
          as my ship left the beetling cliffs behind,\
          moving out to sea. But all the other ships,\
          moored together in the harbour, were destroyed.\
          \
          \'93We sailed on from there with heavy hearts,\
          grieving for dear shipmates we had lost,\
          though glad we had avoided death ourselves,\
[180] until we reached the island of Aeaea,                                                                  \
          where fair-haired Circe lived, fearful goddess\
          with a human voice\'97sister by blood\
          to bloody minded Aeetes, both children\
          of sun god Helios, who gives men light.6\
          Perse, child of Oceanus, was their mother. \
          Here, in silence, we brought our ship to land,                                                           \
          inside a harbour with fine anchorage.\
          Some god was guiding us. Then we disembarked\
          and laid up in that spot two days and nights,\
[190] our hearts consumed with weariness and pain.                                         \
          \
          \'93When fair-haired Dawn gave birth to the third day,              \
          with my sharp sword and spear I quickly climbed\
          above the ships up to a vantage point,\
          to see if I could notice signs of men\
          or hear their voices. From the rocky lookout\
          where I stood, I could see smoke rising\
          from the spacious grounds of Circe\'92s home\
          through dense brush and trees. Seeing the smoke,                                               \
          my mind and heart considered going down\
[200] to look around. But as I thought about it,                                                       \
          the best initial action seemed to be                                 \
          to get back to our swift ship by the shore,\
          let my comrades eat, then send them out\
          to reconnoiter. On my way back there,\
          in a lonely place close to our curved ship,\
          some god pitied me and sent across my path\
          a huge stag with massive antlers, on its way\
          from pastures in the woods towards the river\
          for a drink\'97the sun\'92s heat forced it down.                                                                  \
[210] As it came out, I struck it in the spine,                                                               \
          the middle of its back. My bronze-tipped spear        \
          sliced right through\'97with a groan the stag collapsed\
          down in the dust, and its spirit left the beast.\
          Planting my foot, I pulled my bronze spear\
          out of the wound and left it lying there,\
          on the ground. I picked up some willow shoots\
          and wove a rope about six feet in length,\
          by plaiting them together back and forth,\
          until they were well twisted. After that,\
[220] I tied the huge creature\'92s feet together,                                                             \
          and, carrying it across my back, returned                   \
          to my black ship. I had to support myself\
          by  leaning on my spear\'97there was no way\
          I could just sling a beast as large as that                                                                           \
          and hold it on my shoulder with one hand.7\
          I tossed the stag down right before our ship\
          and cheered up my crew with words of comfort,\
          standing by each man in turn:\
          \
          \'91My friends,\
          we\'92re not going down to Hades\'92 house just yet,\
[230] although we\'92re grieving, not until the day                        \
          our fate confronts us. So come on now,                  \
          while there\'92s food and drink in our swift ship,\
          let\'92s think of eating, so we don\'92t waste away\
          and die of hunger.\'92\
          \
          \'93That\'92s what I said. My words\
          soon won them over. Uncovering their heads,\
          they were amazed at the stag lying there,\
          such a huge beast beside the restless sea.                                                                        \
          Once they\'92d had their fill of looking at it,\
          they washed their hands and made a splendid meal.\
[240] So all day long until the sun went down                                   \
          we sat feasting on that huge supply of meat\
          and on sweet wine. When the sun had set\
          and darkness came, we lay down on the shore.\
          \
          \'93As soon as rose-fingered early Dawn appeared,\
          I called a meeting and addressed them all:\
          \
          \'91Shipmates, though you\'92re all feeling our distress,\
          listen now to what I have to tell you.\
          My friends, how far east or west we are                                                       \
          we just don\'92t know, or how far away\
[250] from where the Sun, who brings men light,                                    \
          goes down underneath the earth or rises.8\
          But let\'92s quickly put our heads together\
          to see if we have any options left.\
          I don\'92t think we do. I climbed a rocky crag,\
          and from that vantage point spied out the land.\
          It\'92s an island with deep water round it,\
          low-lying and flat. I saw with my own eyes\
          smoke rising in the middle of the island, \
          through dense brush and trees.\'92\
          \
          \'93That\'92s what I said.\
[260] But their spirits fell, as they remembered                                 \
          what Laestrygonian Antiphates had done\
          and the violence of great Polyphemus,                                                                             \
          that man-eating Cyclops. They wept aloud,\
          shedding frequent tears. But their laments\
          were not much help to us. So I split up\
          my well-armed comrades in two separate groups,\
          each with its own leader. I commanded one,\
          and godlike Eurylochus led the other.\
          We shook our tokens in a bronze helmet.\
[270] When brave Eurylochus\'92 lot fell out,                                                                     \
          he set off with twenty-two companions,\
          all in tears, leaving us behind to grieve.\
          In a forest clearing they found Circe\'92s house\'97                                                        \
          built of polished stone, with views in all directions.\
          There were mountain wolves and lions round it,\
          all bewitched by Circe\'92s wicked potions.\
          But these beasts made no attack against my men. \
          No. They stood on their hind legs and fawned,\
          wagging their long tails. Just as dogs will beg\
[280] around their master when he comes from dinner\'97                 \
          since he keeps bringing scraps to please their hearts\'97\
          that\'92s how the wolves and sharp-clawed lions there\
          kept fawning round those men, who were afraid\
          just looking at those fearful animals.\
          They stood in fair-haired Circe\'92s gateway                                                                       \
          and heard her sweet voice singing in the house,\
          as she went back and forth before her loom,\
          weaving a huge, immortal tapestry,\
          the sort of work which goddesses create,\
[290] finely woven, luminous, and beautiful.                                                             \
          Then Polites, one of the men\'92s leaders,\
          the man I trusted most and cherished\
          more than any of my comrades, spoke:\
          \
          \'91My friends, someone\'92s in there moving to and fro,\
          before a giant tapestry, and singing\
          so sweetly the floor echoes to her song\'97\
          perhaps a goddess, or maybe a woman\'97\
          come, let\'92s call out to her right now.\'92\
          \
          \'93He spoke,\
          and they all started shouting, calling her.\
[300] She came out at once, opened the bright doors,                                       \
          and asked them in. In their foolishness,\
          they all accompanied her. Eurylochus                                                                                \
          was the only one who stayed outside\'97\
          he thought it could be something of a trick.\
          She led the others in and sat them down\
          on stools and chairs, then made them a drink\
          of cheese and barley meal and yellow honey\
          stirred into Pramnian wine. But with the food\
          she mixed a vicious drug, so they would lose\
[310] all memories of home. When they\'92d drunk down                     \
          the drink she gave them, she took her wand,\
          struck each man, then penned them in her pigsties.\
          They had bristles, heads, and voices just like pigs\'97\
          their bodies looked like swine\'97but their minds                                                     \
          were as before, unchanged. In their pens they wept.\
          In front of them Circe threw down feed,\
          acorns, beech nuts, cornel fruit, the stuff\
          pigs eat when they are wallowing in mud.\
          Eurylochus came back immediately\
[320] to our swift black ship, bringing a report                                  \
          of his comrades\'92 bitter fate. But though he tried,\
          he couldn\'92t say a single word, his heart\
          felt too much pain. His eyes were full of tears,\
          his mind transfixed with sorrow. When all of us,\
          astonished, questioned him, he spoke out,\
          telling us of his companions\'92 fate:                                                                                          \
          \
          \'91Lord Odysseus, we went through the woods,\
          as you had ordered and, in a clearing there,\
          found a splendid house built of polished stone,\
[330] with a view in all directions. Inside,                                                         \
          someone was singing in a loud clear voice,\
          in front of an enormous piece of weaving,\
          moving back and forth\'97some god or woman.\
          They all shouted, calling her. She came out, \
          opened up her shining doors without delay,\
          and asked them in. In their foolishness,\
          they all accompanied her inside. But I,\
          thinking it might be a trick, remained behind.\
          Then the whole bunch disappeared, all of them.\
[340] No one came out again. And I sat there                           \
          a long time, watching for them.\'92                                                                          \
          \
          \'93He spoke.\
          I slung my large bronze silver-studded sword\
          across my shoulder, grabbed my bow, and told him\
          to take me back there on the selfsame trail.\
          He gripped me with both hands, clasped my knees,\
          moaned, and spoke to me\'97his words had wings:\
          \
          \'91Child raised by Zeus, don\'92t take me there\
          against my will. Leave me here. I know\
          you won\'92t be coming back again yourself\
[350] or bringing back the rest of your companions.                            \
          No. Let\'92s get out of here and quickly, too,\
          with these men here. We may still escape\
          this day\'92s disasters.\'92\
          \
          \'93That\'92s what he said. \
          But I gave him this answer:                                                                                                           \
          \
          \'91Eurylochus, \
          you can stay right here, in this very spot,\
          eating and drinking by our black hollow ship.\
          But I will go. I don\'92t have any choice.\'92\
          \
          \'93With these words, I went up from the ship and shore.\
          But while I was moving through the sacred groves\
[360] on my way to Circe\'92s home, a goddess                                     \
          skilled in many magic potions, I met\
          Hermes of the Golden Wand. I was going\
          toward the house. He looked like a young man\
          when the first growth of hair is on his lip, \
          the age when youthful charm is at its height.\
          He gripped my hand, spoke to me, and said:                                                             \
          \
          \'91Where are you off to now, you poor man,\
          going through these hills all by yourself\
          and knowing nothing of the country here?\
[370] Your comrades, over there in Circe\'92s house,                                   \
          are penned up like swine in narrow stalls.\
          Are you intending now to set them free?\
          I don\'92t think you\'92ll make it back yourself\'97\
          you\'92ll stay there with the rest of them. But come,\
          I\'92ll keep you free from harm and save you.\
          Here, take a remedial potion with you.\
          Go in Circe\'92s house. It\'92s a protection\
          and will clear your head of any dangers\
          this day brings. Now I\'92ll describe for you\
[380] each and every one of Circe\'92s fatal ploys.                                          \
          She\'92ll mix a drink for you and with the food                                           \
          include a drug. But she won\'92t have power\
          to cast a spell on you. This fine potion,\
          which I\'92ll provide you, won\'92t allow it.\
          I\'92ll tell you now in detail. When Circe \
          strikes you with her elongated wand,\
          then draw that sharp sword on your thigh and charge,\
          just as if you meant to slaughter her.\
          She\'92ll be afraid. And then she\'92ll order you\
[390] to sleep with her. At that point don\'92t refuse                      \
          to share a goddess\'92 bed, if you want her\
          to free your crew and entertain you.\
          But tell her she must swear a solemn oath,\
          on all the blessed gods, not to make plans\
          to harm you with some other injury,                                                               \
          so when she\'92s got you with your clothes off,\
          she won\'92t change you to an unmanned weakling.\'92\
          \
          \'93After saying this, the Killer of Argus\
          pulled a herb out of the ground, gave it to me,\
[400] and explained its features. Its roots were black,                                      \
          the flower milk-white. Moly the gods call it.9\
          It\'92s hard for mortal men to pull it out,\
          but gods have power to do anything.\
          Then Hermes left, through the wooded island,\
          bound for high Olympus. I continued on\
          to Circe\'92s home. As I kept going, my heart\
          was turning over many gloomy thoughts. \
          Once I\'92d made it over to the gateway                                                                                 \
          of fair-haired Circe\'92s house, I just stood there\
[410] and called out. The goddess heard my voice.                                               \
          She came out at once, opened her bright doors,\
          and asked me in. So I went in with her,\
          heart full of misgivings. She led me in\
          and sat me on a silver-studded chair,\
          a lovely object, beautifully made,\
          with a stool underneath to rest my feet.\
          She mixed her potion in a golden cup\
          for me to drink. In it she placed the drug,\
          her heart still bent on mischief. She gave it me,\
[420] and, when I\'92d drunk it, without being bewitched,                                   \
          she struck me with her wand and said these words:\
          \
          \'91Off now to your sty, and lie in there                                                              \
          with the rest of your companions.\'92\
          \
          \'93She spoke.\
          But I pulled out the sharp sword on my thigh\
          and charged at Circe, as if I meant to kill her.\
          She gave a piercing scream, ducked, ran up,\
          and clasped my knees. Through her tears she spoke\'97\
          her words had wings:\
          \
          \'91What sort of man are you?\
          Where are you from?  Where is your city?\
[430] Your parents? I\'92m amazed you drank this drug                \
          and were not bewitched. No other man\
          who\'92s swallowed it has been able to resist,\
          once it\'92s passed the barrier of his teeth.\
          In that chest of yours your mind holds out\
          against my spell. You must be Odysseus,                                                    \
          that resourceful man. The Killer of Argus,\
          Hermes of the Golden Wand, always told me\
          Odysseus in his swift black ship would come\
          on his way back from Troy. Come, put that sword\
[440] back in its sheath, and let the two of us                            \
          go up into my bed. When we\'92ve made love,\
          then we can trust each other.\'92\
          \
          \'93Once she said this, \
          I answered her and said:\
          \
          \'91O Circe, \
          how can you ask me to be kind to you?\
          In your own home you\'92ve changed my crew to pigs\
          and keep me here. You\'92re plotting mischief now,\
          inviting me to go up to your room,                                                                   \
          into your bed, so when I have no clothes,\
          you can do me harm, destroy my manhood.\
[450] But I won\'92t agree to climb into your bed,                                          \
          unless, goddess, you\'92ll agree to swear\
          a solemn oath that you\'92ll make no more plans\
          to injure me with some new mischief.\'92 \
          \
          \'93When I\'92d said this, she made the oath at once,\
          as I had asked, that she\'92d not harm me.\
          Once she\'92d sworn and finished with the oath,\
          I went up with Circe to her splendid bed.\
          \
          \'93Meanwhile four women serving in her home\
          were busy in the hall, children of springs,                                                                      \
[460] groves, and sacred rivers flowing to the sea.                                                \
          One of them threw lovely purple coverlets \
          across the chairs and spread linen underneath.\
          Another pulled silver tables over to each chair\
          and then placed silver baskets on them.\
          The third one mixed deliciously sweet wine\
          inside a silver bowl, then served it out \
          in cups of gold. The fourth brought water in,\
          lit a large fire under a huge cauldron,\
          and warmed the water up until it boiled\
[470] inside the shining bronze. She sat me in a tub,                                                 \
          then, diluting water from that cauldron\
          so it was right for me, gave me a bath,\
          pouring water on my head and shoulders,\
          until the weariness that sapped my spirit\
          had left my limbs. After bathing me,\
          she rubbed me with rich oil, then dressed me\
          in a fine cloak and tunic and led me\
          to a handsome chair embossed with silver, \
          finely crafted, with a footstool underneath.\
[480] A servant brought in a lovely golden jug,                                                        \
          poured water out into a silver basin,\
          so I could wash, and set a polished table                                                                         \
          at my side. Then the worthy steward \
          brought in bread and set it there before me,\
          placing with it large quantities of food,\
          given freely from her stores. She bid me eat.\
          But in my heart I had no appetite.\
          So I sat there, thinking of other things,\
          my spirit sensing something ominous.\
[490] When Circe noticed me just sitting there,                                                       \
          not reaching for the food, weighed down with grief,\
          she came up close and spoke winged words to me:\
          \
          \'91Odysseus, why are you sitting here like this,\
          like someone who can\'92t speak, eating out your heart,\
          never touching food or drink? Do you think\
          this is another trick?  You don\'92t need to fear\'97                                    \
          I\'92ve already made a solemn promise \
          I won\'92t injure you.\'92\
          \
          \'93When she said this,\
          I answered her and said:\
          \
          \'91O Circe,\
[500] what man with any self-respect would start                      \
          to eat and drink before he had released\
          his shipmates and could see them face to face?\
          If you are being sincere in asking me\
          to eat and drink, then set my comrades free,\
          so my own eyes can see my trusty crew.\'92\
          \
          \'93When I\'92d said this, Circe went through the hall,\
          her wand clutched in her hand, and opened up\
          the pig-sty doors. She drove the herd out.\
          They looked like full-grown pigs, nine years old,                                                   \
[510] standing in front of her. She went through them,                                   \
          smearing on each one another potion.\
          Those bristles brought on by that nasty drug\
          which they\'92d received from Circe earlier\
          fell from their limbs, and they were men again, \
          more youthful and much taller than before, \
          more handsome to the eye. Now they knew me.\
          Each man grabbed my hand, and all of them\
          were overcome with passionate weeping,\
          so the house around them echoed strangely.\
[520] Circe herself was moved to pity then\'97                                     \
          standing close to me, the lovely goddess said:                                                           \
          \
          \'91Son of Laertes, resourceful Odysseus,\
          born from Zeus, go now to the sea shore,\
          back to your swift ship, drag it up on land,\
          and stash your goods and all equipment\
          in the caves. Then come back here in person,\
          and bring your loyal companions with you.\'92\
          \
          \'93Her words persuaded my proud heart. I left,\
          going back to our swift ship beside the sea.\
[530] I found my trusty comrades at the ship                                     \
          lamenting miserably, shedding many tears.\
          Just as on a farm calves frisk around the herd                                                           \
          when cows, having had their fill of grazing,\
          return back to the yard\'97they skip ahead,\
          and pens no longer hold them, as they run, \
          mooing in a crowd around their mothers,\
          that\'92s how my shipmates, once they saw me,\
          thronged around, weeping\'97in their hearts it felt\
          as if they they\'92d got back to their native land,\
[540] the rugged town of Ithaca itself,                                                                                \
          where they were born and bred. In their distress\
          they spoke winged words to me:\
          \
          \'91You\'92re back,\
          you favourite of Zeus. We glad of that,\
          as if we had returned to Ithaca,                                                                            \
          our native land. But come, tell us\
          how the rest of our comrades came to grief.\'92\
          \
          \'93They spoke. I replied and calmed them down:\
          \
          \'91First of all, let\'92s drag the ship onshore,\
          stow all our goods and tackle in the caves.\
[550] Then you can rouse yourselves and come with me,                \
          see your comrades in Circe\'92s sacred home,\
          eating and drinking. They have lots of both.\'92\
          \
          \'93The words I spoke quickly brought them round.\
          Of all my shipmates there, Eurylochus\
          was the only one to hesitate. He spoke\'97                                                                       \
          his words to them had wings:\
          \
          \'91You wretched creatures, \
          where are you going? Are you so in love\
          with these disasters you\'92ll go back there,\
          to Circe\'92s house, where she\'92ll transform you all\
[560] to pigs or wolves or lions, so we\'92ll be forced                     \
          to protect her great house for her? It\'92s like\
          what the Cyclops did, when our companions\
          went inside his cave with this reckless man,\
          Odysseus\'97thanks to his foolhardiness\
          those men were killed.\'92\
          \
          \'93Eurylochus finished.\
          Then my heart considered drawing the long sword\
          hanging on my sturdy thigh and striking him,\
          slicing off his head and knocking it to earth,                                                              \
          even though he was a relative of mine,\
[570] closely linked by marriage.10 But my crewmen,                                        \
          one by one, relaxed me with their soothing words:\
          \
          \'91Child of Zeus, if you give the order,\
          we\'92ll leave him behind. He can stay here,\
          beside the ship, and stand guard over it,\
          while you lead us to Circe\'92s sacred home.\'92\
          \
          \'93This said, they moved up from the ships and shore.\
          And Eurylochus was not left behind\
          at the hollow ship. He came along as well,\
          afraid I might reprimand him harshly.\
          \
[580] \'93Meanwhile, Circe had been acting kindly                                \
          to the rest of my companions in her home.\
          She\'92d given them baths, rubbed them with rich oil,                                             \
          and dressed them in warm cloaks and tunics.\
          We found them all quite cheerful, eating\
          in the hall. When my men saw each other\
          and recognized their shipmates face to face,\
          their crying and moaning echoed through the house.\
          The lovely goddess came to me and said:\
          \
          \'91Resourceful Odysseus, Laertes\'92 son\
[590] and Zeus\'92 child, you should no longer rouse                     \
          an outburst of such grief. I know myself \
          every pain you\'92ve suffered on the fish-filled seas,\
          every wrong that hostile men have done on land.\
          But come now, eat my food, and drink my wine,                              \
          until you\'92ve got back that spirit in your chest\
          you had when you first left your native land\
          of rugged Ithaca. You\'92re exhausted now\'97\
          you have no spirit\'97you\'92re always brooding\
          on your painful wanderings. There\'92s no joy\
[600] inside your hearts\'97you\'92ve been through so much.\'92                \
          \
          \'93Our proud hearts were persuaded by her words.\
          We stayed there, day by day, for one whole year, \
          feasting on sweet wine and large supplies of meat.\
          But as the months and seasons came and went,\
          long spring days returned. A year had passed.                                                          \
          My trusty comrades summoned me and said:\
          \
          \'91You god-driven man, now the time has come\
          to think about your native land once more,\
          if you are fated to be saved and reach\
[610] your high-roofed home and your own country.\'92                         \
          \
          \'93My proud heart was persuaded by their words.\
          So all day long until the sun went down,\
          we sat there, feasting on huge amounts of meat\
          and on sweet wine. Once the sun had set\
          and darkness came, they lay down to sleep\
          in the shadowy hall. I went to Circe,                                                                                   \
          in her splendid bed, and clasped her knees.\
          The goddess listened to me as I begged, \
          speaking these winged words to her: \
          \
[620] \'91Circe, grant me the promise which you made                  \
          to send me home. My spirit\'92s keen to leave,\
          as are the hearts in my companions, too, \
          who, as they grieve around me, drain my heart,\
          whenever you are not among us.\'92\
          \
          \'93I spoke. The lovely goddess answered me at once.\
          \
          \'91Resourceful Odysseus, Laertes\'92 son\
          and Zeus\'92 child, if it\'92s against your will,\
          you should not now remain here in my house.\
          But first you must complete another journey\'97                                   \
[630] to the home of Hades and dread Persephone.                              \
          Consult the shade of that Theban prophet,\
          blind Teiresias. His mind is unimpaired.\
          Even though he\'92s dead, Persephone\
          has granted him the power to understand\'97\
          the others flit about, mere shadows.\'92\
          \
          \'93As Circe finished, my spirit was breaking.\
          I sat weeping on her bed for my heart\
          no longer wished to live or glimpse the daylight.\
          But when I\'92d had enough of shedding tears \
[640] and rolling in distress, I answered her:                                                                     \
          \
          \'91Circe, who\'92ll be the guide on such a journey?\
          No one ever sailed a black ship down to Hades.\'92\
          \
          \'93The lovely goddess gave me a quick answer:\
          \
          \'91Resourceful Odysseus, Laertes\'92 son\
          and Zeus\'92 child, don\'92t concern yourself\
          about a pilot for your ship. Raise the mast,\
          spread your white sail, and just take your seat.\
          Then the breath of North Wind Boreas\
          will take you on your way. But once your ship\
[650] crosses flowing Oceanus, drag it ashore                            \
          at Persephone\'92s groves, on the level beach,\
          where tall poplars grow, willows shed their fruit,                                \
          right beside deep swirling Oceanus.\
          Then you must go to Hades\'92 murky home.\
          There Periphlegethon and Cocytus,\
          a stream which branches off the river Styx,\
          flow into Acheron. There\'92s a boulder\
          where these two foaming rivers meet. Go there,\
          heroic man, and follow my instructions\'97\
[660] move close and dig a hole there two feet square.                   \
          Pour libations to the dead around it,\
          first with milk and honey, next sweet wine,\
          and then a third with water. And shake out                                             \
          white barley meal. Then pray there in earnest\
          to many powerless heads of those who\'92ve died,\
          with a vow that, when you reach Ithaca,\
          at home you\'92ll sacrifice a barren heifer,\
          the best you have, and will cram the altar\
          with fine gifts, and that you\'92ll make an offering\
[670] to Teiresias, a black ram just for him,                                                   \
          the finest creature in your flocks. And then,\
          when you\'92ve offered prayers of supplication\
          to celebrated nations of the dead,\
          you must sacrifice a ram and a black ewe, \
          twisting their heads down toward Erebus,\
          while you turn to face the flowing rivers,\
          looking backwards. At that point many spirits\
          will emerge\'97they\'92re the shadows of the dead.                                     \
          Then call your crew. Tell them to flay and burn\
[680] the sheep lying there, killed by pitiless bronze.                           \
          Pray to the gods, to powerful Hades\
          and dread Persephone. Then from your thigh,\
          you must yourself draw that sharp sword out,\
          and, sitting there, prevent the powerless heads\
          of those who\'92ve died from coming near the blood,\
          until you\'92ve listened to Teiresias.\
          That prophet, the leader of his people,\
          will soon come to you. He\'92ll tell you your course,\
          the distance you must go on your return,\
[690] and how to sail across the fish-filled seas.\'92                            \
          \
          \'93Circe finished. Dawn soon came on her golden throne.\
          The nymph then dressed me in a cloak and tunic\
          and clothed her body in a long white robe,\
          a lovely, finely woven garment, and tied\
          a splendid golden belt around her waist.\
          On her head she placed a veil. Then I went\
          through her house, rousing my companions,\
          going up to each man and reassuring him:\
          \
          \'91No more sleeping now, no sweet slumbering.\
[700] Let\'92s go. Queen Circe\'92s told me what to do.\'92                                   \
          \
          \'93That what I said. And their proud hearts agreed.                                                  \
          But I could not lead my men off safely,\
          not even from that place. Of all of them\
          the youngest was Elpenor, in battle\
          not all that brave or clever. He\'92d lain down\
          in Circe\'92s sacred home some distance off,\
          away from his companions. Heavy with wine,\
          he\'92d climbed onto the roof, seeking cooler air.\
          When he heard the noise and the commotion\
[710] made by his shipmates as they moved around,                                          \
          he jumped up on the spot, but then forgot\
          to use the long ladder to come down again.\
          He fell headfirst from the roof, snapped his neck,\
          and broke his spine. His spirit went to Hades.                                                          \
          As my men came out, I spoke to them and said:\
          \
          \'91No doubt you now believe you\'92re going home,\
          back to your dear native land. But Circe\
          has stated we must take a different route,\
          to Hades\'92 home and dread Persephone,\
[720] to meet the shade of Teiresias from Thebes.\'92                                 \
          \
          \'93That\'92s what I said, and it broke their spirits.\
          Sitting down right where they were, they wept,\
          they tore their hair. But their laments were useless.\
          We moved down to our swift ship by the shore,    \
          shedding many tears of grief. Meanwhile Circe                                                       \
          went out and tied a ram and a black ewe\
          by our black ship. She\'92d slipped past us with ease,\
          for who can see a god going back and forth,\
          if she has no desire to be observed?\'94}