{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf460
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural\qc

\f0\fs24 \cf0 BOOK ELEVEN\
Odysseus Meets the Shades of The Dead\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural
\cf0           \
[Odysseus continues his narrative: Odysseus and his men sail to Oceanus, land there, and make a sacrifice; the shades of the dead come up out of the hole; Elpenor\'92s shade appears first and asks for burial; then Odysseus\'92 mother appears; Odysseus has a conversation with Teiresias, who prophesies his future and his death; Odysseus talks with his mother, who gives him news of his family; a series of female shades appears: Tyro, Antiope, Alcmene, Megara, Jocasta, Chloris, Leda, Iphimedea, Phaedra, Procis, Ariadne, Maera, Clymene, and Eriphyle; Odysseus interrupts his narrative to discuss his leaving Phaeacia with Alcinous; Odysseus resumes his story and tells of his encounters with Agamemnon, Achilles, and Ajax; Odysseus describes Minos and Orion and the punishments of Tityus, Tantalus, and Sisyphus; the final shade to appear and speak to Odysseus is the image of Hercules; Odysseus and men return to the ship and sail away from Oceanus.]\
          \
          \'93When we reached our boat down on the beach,\
          we dragged it out into the glittering sea,\
          set up the mast and sail in our black ship,\
          led on the sheep, and then embarked ourselves,\
          still full of sorrow, shedding many tears.\
          But that fearful goddess with a human voice,\
          fair-haired Circe, sent us a welcome breeze,\
          blowing from behind our dark-prowed ship\'97\
          it filled the sail, an excellent companion.\
  [10] Once we\'92d checked the gear all through the ship,                                   \
          we just sat\'97wind and helmsman held the course.                                                \
          All day long, the sail stayed full, and we sped on\
          across the sea, until the sun went down,\
          and all sea routes grew dark. Our ship then reached\
          the boundaries of deep-flowing Oceanus,\
          where Cimmerians have their lands and city,\
          a region always wrapped in mist and cloud.\
          Bright Helios never gazes down on them,\
          not when he rises into starry heaven,\
  [20] or when he turns again from heaven to earth.                                           \
          Fearful Night envelops wretched mortals.\
          We sailed in there, dragged our ship on land,                                                            \
          and walked along the stream of Oceanus,\
          until we reached the place Circe described.\
          \
          \'93Perimedes and Eurylochus held the sheep,\
          our sacrificial victims, while I unsheathed\
          the sharp sword on my thigh and dug a hole,\
          two feet each way. I poured out libations\
          to all the dead\'97first with milk and honey,\
  [30] then sweet wine, and then a third with water.                                            \
          Around the pit I sprinkled barley meal.\
          Then to the powerless heads of the departed\
          I offered many prayers, with promises\
          I\'92d sacrifice, once I returned to Ithaca,\
          a barren heifer in my home, the best I had,                                                                  \
          and load the altar with fine gifts, as well.\
          To Teiresias in a separate sacrifice\
          I\'92d offer up a ram, for him alone,\
          the finest in my flocks. With prayers and vows\
  [40] I called upon the families of the dead.                                                                \
          Next I held the sheep above the hole\
          and slit their throats. Dark blood flowed down.\
          \
          \'93Then out of Erebus came swarming up\
          shades of the dead\'97brides, young unmarried men,\
          old ones worn out with toil, young tender girls,\
          with hearts still new to sorrow, and many men\
          wounded by bronze spears, who\'92d died in war,                                                         \
          still in their blood-stained armour. Crowds of them\
          came thronging in from all sides of the pit,\
[50] with amazing cries. Pale fear took hold of me.                                          \
          Then I called my comrades, ordering them\
          to flay and burn the sheep still lying there,\
          slain by cruel bronze, and pray to the gods,\
          to mighty Hades and dread Persephone.\
          And then I drew the sharp sword on my thigh\
          and sat there, stopping the powerless heads\
          of all the dead from getting near the blood,\
          until I\'92d asked Teiresias my questions.                                                                               \
          \
          \'93The first shade to appear out of the pit \
  [60] was my companion Elpenor, whose corpse                               \
          had not been buried in the broad-tracked earth.\
          We\'92d left his body back in Circe\'92s house,\
          without lament or burial\'97at the time\
          another need was driving us away.\
          When I saw him, I wept. My heart felt pity.\
          So I spoke to him\'97my words had wings: \
          \
          \'91Elpenor, how did you come to this place,\
          this gloomy darkness?  You got here on foot\
          faster than I did, sailing my black ship.\'92\
          \
  [70] \'93I spoke. He groaned and gave me his reply:                                               \
          \
          \'91Resourceful Odysseus, Laertes\'92 son,                                                                      \
          and child of Zeus, some fatal deity  \
          has brought me down\'97that and too much wine.\
          In Circe\'92s house, after I\'92d been sleeping,\
          I didn\'92t think of using the long ladder\
          to get back again. So I fell head first\
          down from the roof. My neck was broken,\
          shattering the spine. My shade departed,\
          going down to Hades\'92 house. I beg you now,\
  [80] in the name of those we left behind,                                                      \
          the ones who are not with us, of your wife,\
          your father, who reared you as a child,\
          and Telemachus, whom you left at home,\
          your only son. I know that your fine ship,\
          once you leave here and sail from Hades\'92 home,\
          will once more reach the island of Aeaea,                                                       \
          where, my lord, I ask you to remember me.\
          When you sail from there, don\'92t leave me behind,\
          unburied, unlamented. Don\'92t turn away,\
  [90] or I may bring gods\'92 anger down on you.                                          \
          Burn me with all the armour I possess.\
          Raise a mound for me by the gray sea shore,\
          memorial to an unfortunate man,\
          for those in times to come. Do this for me.\
          And on the tomb there fix the oar I used\
          while I lived and rowed with my companions.\'92\
          \
          \'93He finished. I answered him and said:\
          \
          \'91Unhappy man, I\'92ll do this, complete it all.\'92                                                    \
          \
          \'93So we two sat in gloomy conversation,\
[100] I, on one side, holding out my sword                                        \
          above the blood, and, on the other side,\
          the shade of my companion speaking out.\
          \
          \'93Then appeared the ghost of my dead mother,\
          Anticleia, brave Autolycus\'92  daughter.\
          I\'92d left her still alive when I set off\
          for sacred Troy. Once I caught sight of her,\
          I wept, and I felt pity in my heart.\
          But still, in spite of all my sorrow,\
          I could not let her get too near the blood,\
[110] until I\'92d asked Teiresias my questions.                                                               \
          \
          \'93Then came the shade of Teiresias from Thebes,                                                     \
          holding a golden staff. He knew who I was\
          and started speaking:\
          \
          \'91Resourceful Odysseus,\
          Laertes\'92 son and Zeus\'92 child, what now,\
          you unlucky man? Why leave the sunlight,\
          come to this joyless place, and see the dead?\
          Move from the pit and pull away your sword,\
          so I may drink the blood and speak the truth.\'92\
          \
          \'93Teiresias finished talking. I drew back\
[120] and thrust my silver-studded sword inside its sheath.                         \
          When the blameless prophet had drunk dark blood,\
          he said these words to me:\
          \
          \'91Glorious Odysseus,                               \
          you ask about your honey-sweet return.\
          But a god will make your journey bitter.\
          I don\'92t think you can evade Poseidon,\
          whose heart is angry at you, full of rage\
          because you blinded his dear son. But still,\
          though you\'92ll suffer badly, you may get home,\
          if you will curb your spirit and your comrades.\
[130] As soon as you\'92ve escaped the dark blue sea                     \
          and reached the island of Thrinacia\
          in your sturdy ship, you\'92ll find grazing there\
          the cattle and rich flocks of Helios,\
          who hears and watches over everything.\
          If you leave them unharmed and keep your mind                                  \
          on your return, you may reach Ithaca,\
          though you\'92ll have trouble. But if you touch them,\
          then I foresee destruction for your crew,\
          for you, and for your ship. And even if\
[140] you yourself escape, you\'92ll get home again                       \
          in distress and late, in someone else\'92s ship,\
          after losing every one of your companions.\
          There\'92ll be trouble in your home\'97arrogant men\
          eating up your livelihood and wooing\
          your godlike wife by giving courtship gifts.\
          But when you come, you\'92ll surely take revenge\
          for all their violence. Once you have killed\
          the suitors in your house with your sharp sword,                                      \
          by cunning or in public, then take up\
[150] a well-made oar and go, until you reach                           \
          a people who know nothing of the sea,\
          who don\'92t put salt on any food they eat,\
          and have no knowledge of ships painted red\
          or well-made oars that serve those ships as wings.\
          I\'92ll tell you a sure sign you won\'92t forget\'97\
          when someone else runs into you and says\
          you\'92ve got a shovel used for winnowing\
          on your broad shoulders, then fix that fine oar\
          in the ground there, and make rich sacrifice                                                 \
[160] to lord Poseidon with a ram, a bull,                                                        \
          and a boar that breeds with sows. Then leave.\
          Go home, and there make sacred offerings\
          to the immortal gods, who hold wide heaven,\
          to all of them in order. Your death will come\
          far from the sea, such a gentle passing,\
          when you are bowed down with a ripe old age,\
          and your people prospering around you.3\
          In all these things I\'92m telling you the truth.\'92\
          \
          \'93He finished speaking. Then I replied and said:\
          \
[170] \'91Teiresias, no doubt the gods themselves                           \
          have spun the threads of this. But come, tell me\'97                                 \
          and speak the truth\'97I can see there the shade\
          of my dead mother, sitting near the blood,\
          in silence. She does not dare confront\
          the face of her own son or speak to him.\
          Tell me, my lord, how she may understand\
          just who I am.\'92\
          \
          \'93When I\'92d finished speaking,\
          Teiresias quickly gave me his reply:\
          \
          \'91I\'92ll tell you so your mind will comprehend.\
[180] It\'92s easy. Whichever shadow of the dead                           \
          you let approach the blood will speak to you\
          and tell the truth, but those you keep away\
          will once again withdraw.\'92\
          \
          \'93After saying this,                                                                \
          the shade of lord Teiresias returned\
          to Hades\'92 home, having made his prophecy.\
          But I stayed there undaunted, till my mother\
          came and drank dark blood. Then she knew me.\
          Full of sorrow, she spoke out\'97her words had wings:\
          \
          \'91My son, how have you come while still alive\
[190] down to this sad darkness?  For living men                      \
          it\'92s difficult to come and see these things\'97\
          huge rivers, fearful waters, stand between us,\
          first and foremost Oceanus, which no man\
          can cross on foot. He needs a sturdy ship.\
          Have you only now come here from Troy,                                                     \
          after a long time wandering with your ship\
          and your companions?  Have you not reached\
          Ithaca, nor seen your wife in your own home?\'92\
          \
          \'93Once she\'92d finished, I answered her:\
          \
          \'91Mother,\
[200] I had to come down here to Hades\'92 home,                                       \
          meet the shade of Teiresias of Thebes,\
          and hear his prophecy. I have not yet\
          come near Achaea\'92s shores or disembarked\
          in our own land. I\'92ve been wandering around\
          in constant misery, ever since I left\
          with noble Agamemnon, bound for Troy,\
          that city celebrated for its horses,\
          to fight against the Trojans. But come now,\
          tell me\'97and make sure you speak the truth\'97                                          \
[210] What grievous form of death destroyed you?                                \
          A lingering disease, or did archer Artemis\
          attack and kill you with her gentle arrows?\
          And tell me of my father and my son,\
          whom I left behind. Do they still possess\
          my kingship, or has another man already\
          taken it, because they now are saying\
          I won\'92t be coming back?  Tell me of the wife\
          I married. What are her thoughts and plans?\
          Is she still there with her son, keeping watch\
[220] on everything? Or has she been married                          \
          to the finest of Achaeans?\'92\
          \
          \'93When I\'92d said this,                               \
          my honoured mother answered me at once:\
          \
          \'91You can be sure she\'92s waiting in your home,\
          her heart still faithful. But her nights and days\
          all end in sorrow, with her shedding tears.\
          As for your noble kingship rights, no one else\
          has taken them as yet. Telemachus\
          controls the land unchallenged and can feast\
          in banquets with his equals, or at least\
[230] those which a man who renders judgment                        \
          should by rights attend. They all invite him.\
          As for your father, he stays on his farm\
          and never travels down into the city.\
          He has no bed or bedding\'97no cloaks\
          or shining coverlets. In wintertime,\
          he sleeps inside the house beside his slaves,                                                  \
          close to the fire in the dirt, and wears\
          disgraceful clothes. During the summer months\
          and in fruitful autumn, he makes his bed\
[240] from fallen leaves scattered on the ground                       \
          here and there along his vineyard slopes.\
          There he lies in sorrow, nursing in his heart\
          enormous grief, longing you\'92ll come back.\
          A harsh old age has overtaken him.\
          That\'92s how I met my fate and died, as well.\
          I was not attacked and killed in my own home\
          by gentle arrows of the keen-eyed archer,\
          nor did I die of some disease which takes                                                       \
          the spirit from our limbs, as we waste away\
[250] in pain. No. It was my longing for you,                                               \
          glorious Odysseus, for your loving care,                      \
          that robbed me of my life, so honey sweet.\'92\
          \
          \'93She finished. I considered how in my heart\
          I wished to hold the shade of my dead mother.\
          Three times my spirit prompted me to grasp her,\
          and I jumped ahead. But each time she slipped\
          out of my arms, like a shadow or a dream.\
          The pain inside my heart grew even sharper.\
          Then I spoke to her\'97my words had wings:\
          \
[260] \'91Mother, why do you not wait for me?                                                           \
          I\'92d like to hold you, so that even here,\
          in Hades\'92 home, we might throw loving arms\
          around each other and then have our fill\
          of icy lamentation. Or are you\
          just a phantom royal Persephone has sent\
          to make me groan and grieve still more?\'92\
          \
          \'93I spoke. My honoured mother quickly said:\
          \
          \'91My child, of all men most unfortunate,\
          no, Persephone, daughter of Zeus,\
[270] is not deceiving you. Once mortals die,                                              \
          this is what\'92s set for them. Their sinews\
          no longer hold the flesh and bone together.\
          The mighty power of blazing fire                                                                             \
          destroys them, once our spirit flies from us,\
          from our white bones. And then it slips away,\
          and, like a dream, flutters to and fro.\
          But hurry to the light as quickly as you can.\
          Remember all these things, so later on\
          you can describe the details to your wife.\'92\
          \
[280] \'93As we talked together, some women came,                                                \
          all wives and daughters of the noblest men,\
          sent out by queen Persephone. They flocked\
          by the black blood, throngs of them. I wondered\
          how I could get to question each of them.\
          To my heart the best idea seemed to be                                                                           \
          to draw the sharp sword by my sturdy thigh\
          and stop them drinking dark blood all at once.\
          So they came forward one by one in turn,\
          and each of them described her lineage,\
[290] and I could question every one of them.                                                          \
          \
          \'93There I saw high-born Tyro first of all,\
          daughter, she said, of noble Samoneus,\
          and wife of Cretheus, son of Aeolus.\
          She\'92d loved the river god Enipeus,\
          most beautiful by far of all the streams\
          that flow on earth. She used to stroll along                                                                   \
          beside the lovely waters of Enipeus.\
          But the Encircler and Shaker of the Earth,\
          taking on the form of Enipeus,\
[300] lay with her in the foaming river mouth.6                                                       \
          A high dark wave rose arching over them,\
          like a mountain, keeping them concealed,\
          the mortal woman and the god. Poseidon\
          removed the virgin\'92s belt and made her sleep.\
          After he\'92d finished having sex with her,\
          the god then held her by the hand and said:\
          \
          \'91Woman, be happy about making love.\
          Before the year goes by, you\'92ll be giving birth\
          to marvelous children, for a god\'92s embrace\
[310] does not lack power. Take good care of them,                                        \
          and raise them well. But now you must go home.\
          Hold your tongue, and don\'92t tell anyone.\
          Know that I am Earthshaker Poseidon.\'92\
          \
          \'93That said, he plunged into the surging sea.\
          Tyro conceived and then gave birth to sons,\
          Pelias and Neleus, and they became\
          two stalwart followers of mighty Zeus.\
          Pelias lived in spacious Iolcus,\
          where he owned many flocks, and Neleus\
[320] made his home in sandy Pylos. Tyro,                                                                  \
          queen among women, bore other children\
          to Cretheus\'97Aeson, Pheres, and Amythaon\'97\
          who loved to go to battle in a chariot.\
          \
          \'93Then I saw Antiope, daughter of Asopus.                                                                      \
          She boasted she\'92d made love with Zeus himself,\
          and borne two sons, Zethus and Amphion,\
          who first established seven-gated Thebes,\
          constructing walls around it\'97for all their strength,\
          they lacked the power to live in spacious Thebes,\
[330] unless the place was fortified. After her,                                                           \
          I saw Alcmene, Amphitryon\'92s wife,\
          who had sex with powerful Zeus and bore\
          that great fighter, lion-hearted Hercules.\
          And I saw Megara, proud Creon\'92s daughter,\
          who married that son of Amphitryon,\
          a man whose fighting spirit never flagged.                                                                     \
          \
          \'93The next I saw was Oedipus\'92 mother,\
          fair Jocasta, who, against her knowledge,\
          undertook a monstrous act\'97she married\
[340] her own son.7 Once he\'92d killed his father,                                                      \
          he made her his wife. And then the gods\
          showed everyone the truth. But Oedipus,\
          thanks to the fatal counsels of the gods,\
          for all his painful suffering, remained king\
          in lovely Thebes, ruling the Cadmeans.\
          But she descended down to Hades\'92 home,\
          the mighty gaoler. She tied a fatal noose\
          to a roof-beam high above her head and died,\
          overwhelmed with grief. But she left behind\
[350] enormous agonies for Oedipus,                                                                                \
          all that a mother\'92s Furies can inflict.8                                                                                  \
          \
          \'93Next I saw lovely Chloris, whom Neleus\
          married because she was so beautiful,\
          after he\'92d given countless courtship gifts.\
          She was the youngest child of Amphion,\
          son of Iasus, once the mighty king\
          of Minyan Orchomenus. As queen in Pylos,\
          she bore her husband splendid children\'97\
          Nestor, Chromius, noble Periclymenus,\
[360] and lovely Pero, a mortal wonder,                                                                         \
          so much so that all the neighbouring men\
          sought her hand in marriage. But Neleus\
          wouldn\'92t give her to anyone except the man\
          who drove great Iphicles\'92 cattle herd                                                                                    \
          from Phylace\'97broad-faced beasts with spiral horns,\
          and hard to manage. A trusty prophet\
          was the only one who promised he would try,\
          but a painful fate determined by the gods\
          ensnared him\'97those savage cattle herders\
[370] imprisoned him in cruel bondage.9                                                                       \
          But as the days and months went by, bringing\
          a change in seasons, the new year rolled in,\
          and mighty Iphicles had him released\'97\
          after he\'92d told them all his prophecies,\
          and Zeus\'92 will then came to be fulfilled.\
          \
          \'93Then I saw Leda, wife of Tyndareus.\
          She bore Tyndareus two stout-hearted sons,\
          horse-taming Castor and Polydeuces,                                                                                 \
[380] the illustrious boxer.10 Life-giving earth                                    \
          has buried them, although they live on still.\
          Even in the world below Zeus honours them.\
          On every other day they are alive\
          and then, on alternating days, are dead.\
          And they have won respect reserved for gods.\
          \
          \'93After Leda, I saw Iphimedea,\
          wife of Aloeus. Poseidon, she said,\
          had made love to her, and she\'92d had two sons,\
          godlike Otus and famed Ephialtes.\
[390] Though neither one of them lived very long,                                              \
          grain-giving Earth had raised them up to be\
          the tallest and handsomest men by far,                                                                            \
          after glorious Orion. They stood,\
          at nine years old, twenty-two feet wide\
          and fifty-four feet high.11 But they threatened\
          to bring the battle din of furious war\
          against the immortals on Olympus.\
          They wished to pile mount Ossa on Olympus,\
          then stack Pelion with its trembling forests \
[400] on top of Ossa.12 Then they could storm heaven.                                    \
          And if they\'92d reached their full-grown height as men,\
          they might well have succeeded. But Zeus\'92 son,\
          the one whom Leto bore, killed both of them,\
          before the hair below their temples grew\
          and hid their chins beneath a full-fledged beard.13                                                 \
          \
          \'93I saw Phaedra, Procis, and fair Ariadne,\
          daughter of Minos, whose mind loved slaughter.\
          Theseus brought her once away from Crete\
          to the hill in sacred Athens. But he got\
[410] no joy of her. Before he did, Artemis                                        \
          on sea-girt Dia killed Ariadne,\
          because of something Dionysus said.14\
          \
          \'93And I saw Maera and Clymene,\
          and hateful Eriphyle, too, who sold\
          her dear husband\'92s life for precious gold.\
          I cannot mention all the woman I saw,\
          every wife and daughter of those heroes\'97\
          immortal night would end before I finished.                                                               \
          It\'92s time to sleep, in my swift ship or here.\
[420] How I am escorted from this place                                            \
          is now up to you and to the gods.\'94\
          \
          Odysseus paused. All Phaeacians sat in silence,\
          saying not a word, spellbound in the shadowy hall.\
          The first to speak was white-armed Arete, who said:\
          \
          \'93Phaeacians, how does this man seem to you\
          for beauty, stature, and within himself,\
          a fair, well-balanced mind?  He is my guest,\
          though each of you shares in this honour, too.\
          So don\'92t be quick to send him on his way,\
[430] and don\'92t hold back your gifts to one in need.                                                   \
          Thanks to favours from the gods, you have\
          many fine possessions stored away at home.\'94\
          \
          Then old warrior Echeneus addressed them all\'97\
          one of the Phaeacian elders there among them:\
          \
          \'93Friends, what our wise queen has just said to us,\
          as we\'92d expect, is not wide of the mark.\
          You must attend to her. But the last word\
          and the decision rest with Alcinous.\'94\
          \
          Once Echeneus finished, Alcinous spoke out:\
          \
[440] \'93The queen indeed will have the final word,                                                \
          as surely as I live and am the king\
          of the Phaeacians, men who love the oar.\
          But though our guest is longing to return,                                                                      \
          let him try to stay until tomorrow.\
          By then I\'92ll have completed all our gifts.\
          His leaving here is everyone\'92s concern,\
          especially mine, since I control this land.\'94\
          \
          Resourceful Odysseus then replied to him and said:\
          \
          \'93Lord Alcinous, of all men most renowned,\
[450] if you asked me to stay for one whole year,                                                  \
          to organize my escort and give splendid gifts,\
          then I would still agree. It\'92s far better\
          to get back to one\'92s own dear native land\
          with more wealth in hand. I\'92ll win more respect,                                                    \
          more love from anyone who looks at me,\
          whenever I return to Ithaca.\'94\
          \
          Alcinous then answered him and said:\
          \
          \'93Odysseus,\
          when we look at you, we do not perceive\
          that you\'92re in any way a lying fraud,\
[460] like many men the black earth nourishes                                 \
          and scatters everywhere, who make up lies\
          from things no man has seen. You speak so well,\
          and you have such a noble heart inside.\
          You\'92ve told your story with a minstrel\'92s skill,                                                              \
          the painful agonies of all the Argives\
          and your own, as well. Come then, tell me this\'97\
          and speak the truth\'97did you see any comrades,\
          those godlike men who went with you to Troy\
          and met their fate there?  This night before us\
[470] will be lengthy, astonishingly so.                                                                              \
          It\'92s not yet time to sleep here in the halls,\
          so tell me of these marvelous events.\
          I could stay here until bright Dawn arrives,\
          if you\'92d agree to tell me in this room\
          the tale of your misfortunes.\'94\
          \
          Resourceful Odysseus\
          then answered him and said:\
          \
          \'93Lord Alcinous,\
          most renowned among all men, there\'92s a time\
          for many stories and a time for sleep.\
          If you are eager to hear even more,                                                                                      \
[480] I will not hesitate to speak to you                                             \
          of other things more pitiful than these.\
          I mean the troubles of those friends of mine\
          who perished later, who managed to escape\
          the Trojans frightening battle cries, but died\
          when they returned, thanks to the deviousness\
          of a malicious woman.\
          \
          \'93Once sacred Persephone\
          dispersed those female shadows here and there,\
          then the grieving shade of Agamemnon,\
          son of Atreus, appeared. Around him\
[490] other shades had gathered, all those who died                          \
          and met their fate alongside Agamemnon\
          in Aegisthus\'92 house. He knew me at once.                                                                     \
          When he\'92d drunk some blood, he wept aloud,\
          shedding many tears, stretching out his hands,\
          keen to reach me. But he no longer had\
          any inner power or strength, not like\
          the force his supple limbs possessed before.\
          I looked at him and wept. Pity filled my heart.\
          Then I spoke to him\'97my words had wings:\
          \
[500] \'91Lord Agamemnon, son of Atreus,                                                            \
          king of men, what fatal net of grievous death\
          destroyed you? Did Poseidon stir the winds                                      \
          into a furious storm and strike your ships?\
          Or were you killed by enemies on land,\
          while you were cutting out their cattle\
          or rich flocks of sheep? Or were you fighting\
          to seize their city and their women?\'92\
          \
          \'93I paused, and he at once gave me his answer:\
          \
          \'91Resourceful Odysseus, Laertes\'92 son,\
[510] and Zeus\'92 child, Poseidon didn\'92t kill me                            \
          in my ships by rousing savage winds\
          into a vicious storm. Nor was I killed\
          by enemies on land. No. Aegisthus\
          brought on my fatal end. He murdered me,\
          and he was helped by my accursed wife,                                                          \
          after he\'92d invited me into his home\
          and prepared a feast for me, like an ox\
          one butchers in its stall. And so I died\
          the most pitiful of deaths. Around me \
[520] they kept killing the rest of my companions,                                 \
          like white-tusked pigs at some wedding feast,\
          communal meal, or fine drinking party\
          in a powerful and rich man\'92s home.\
          You\'92ve encountered dying men before,\
          many of them, those slain in single combat\
          or the thick of war. But if you\'92d seen that,\
          your heart would\'92ve felt great pity. There we were,\
          lying in the hall among the mixing bowls\
          and tables crammed with food, the entire floor                                        \
[530] awash with blood. The saddest thing I heard                     \
          was Cassandra, Priam\'92s daughter, screaming.\
          That traitor Clytaemnestra slaughtered her\
          right there beside me. Though I was dying,\
          I raised my arms to strike her with my sword,\
          but that dog-faced bitch turned her back on me.\
          Though I was on my way to Hades,\
          she made no attempt to use her fingers\
          to close my eyelids or to shut my mouth.15\
          The truth is, there\'92s nothing more disgusting,\
[540] more disgraceful, than a woman whose heart                   \
          is set on deeds like this\'97the way she planned\
          the shameless act, to arrange the murder                                                        \
          of the man she\'92d married. I really thought\
          I\'92d be warmly welcomed when I reached home\
          by my children and my slaves. That woman,\
          more than anyone, has covered herself\
          and women born in years to come with shame,\
          even the ones whose deeds are virtuous.\'92\
          \
          \'93Agamemnon finished. I answered him at once:\
          \
[550] \'91That\'92s horrible. Surely wide-thundering Zeus                  \
          for many years has shown a dreadful hate \
          towards the family of Atreus,\
          thanks to the conniving of some woman.\
          Many died for Helen\'92s sake, and then\
          Clytaemnestra organized a trap for you,\
          while you were somewhere far away.\'92\
          \
          \'93I spoke,\
          and he immediately replied, saying:                                                                                     \
          \
          \'91That\'92s why you should never treat them kindly,\
          not even your own wife. Never tell her\
[560] all the things you\'92ve determined in your mind.                          \
          Tell her some, but keep the rest well hidden.\
          But in your case, Odysseus, death won\'92t come\
          at your wife\'92s hand, for wise Penelope,\
          Icarius\'92 daughter, is a virtuous woman,\
          with an understanding heart. When we left\
          to go to war, she\'92d not been married long.\
          She had a young lad at her breast, a child,\
          who now, I think, sits down among the men,\
          happy his dear father will notice him                                                                   \
[570] when he comes back home. Then he\'92ll welcome him       \
          in an appropriate way. But my wife\
          didn\'92t let my eyes feast on my own son.\
          Before I could do that, she slaughtered me,\
          her husband. But I\'92ll tell you something else\'97\
          keep this firmly in your mind. Bring your ship\
          back to your dear native land in secret,\
          without public display. For there\'92s no trust\
          in women any more. But come, tell me\'97\
          and speak the truth\'97whether you chanced to hear\
[580] where my son\'92s living now. He may well be                     \
          in Orchomenus or in sandy Pylos,\
          or perhaps in Sparta with Menelaus.                                                                    \
          For noble Orestes has not yet died\
          up there on the earth.\'92\
          \
          \'93Once Agamemnon paused,\
          I gave him my answer right away:\
          \
          \'91Son of Atreus, why ask me that question?\
          I don\'92t know whether he\'92s alive or dead.\
          And there\'92s no point in prattling like the wind.\'92\
          \
          \'93So we two stood there in sad conversation,\
[590] full of sorrow and shedding many tears.                                                          \
          Then Achilles\'92 shade came up, son of Peleus,\
          with those of splendid Antilochus\
          and Patroclus, too, as well as Ajax,\
          who in his looks and body was the best\
          of all Danaans, after Achilles,                                                            \
          who had no equal. Then the shadow\
          of the swift-footed son of Aeacus\
          knew who I was, and with a cry of grief,\
          he spoke to me\'97his words had wings:16\
          \
[600] \'91Resourceful Odysseus, Laertes\'92 son                                  \
          and Zeus\'92 child, what a bold man you are!\
          What exploit will your heart ever dream up\
          to top this one?  How can you dare to come\
          down into Hades\'92 home, the dwelling place\
          for the mindless dead, shades of worn-out men?\'92\
          \
          \'93Achilles spoke. I answered him at once:\
          \
          \'91Achilles, son of Peleus, mightiest\
          by far of the Achaeans, I came here\
          because I had to see Teiresias.\
[610] He might tell me a plan for my return                                       \
          to rugged Ithaca. I\'92ve not yet come near\
          Achaean land. I\'92ve still not disembarked\
          in my own country. I\'92m in constant trouble.\
          But as for you, Achilles, there\'92s no man\
          in earlier days who was more blest than you,\
          and none will come in future. Before now,\
          while you were still alive, we Argives\
          honoured you as we did the gods. And now,\
          since you\'92ve come here, you rule with power\
[620] among those who have died. So Achilles,                                          \
          you have no cause to grieve because you\'92re dead.\'92\
          \
          \'93I paused, and he immediately replied:\
          \
          \'91Don\'92t try to comfort me about my death,\
          glorious Odysseus. I\'92d rather live\
          working as a wage-labourer for hire\
          by some other man, one who had no land\
          and not much in the way of livelihood,                                                             \
          than lord it over all the wasted dead.\
          But come, tell me of my noble son\'97\
[630] whether he went off to war or not.                                                           \
          Did he became a leader?  Talk to me\
          about great Peleus, if there\'92s something\
          you have heard. Is he still held in honour\
          among the many Myrmidons? Do men\
          disparage him in Greece and Phthia\
          because old age now grips his hands and feet?\
          I am not there, living in the sunlight,\
          to help him with the power I once had\
          in spacious Troy, when I killed their best men                                           \
[640] and kept the Argives safe. But if I came                            \
          back to my father\'92s house with strength like that,\
          though only for the briefest moment,\
          those who act with disrespect against him,\
          denying him honour, would soon come to fear\
          my force, these overpowering hands of mine.\'92\
          \
          \'93Achilles spoke. I answered him at once:\
          \
          \'91To tell the truth, I\'92ve heard nothing at all\
          of worthy Peleus. As for your son,\
          dear Neoptolemus, I can tell you\
[650] the entire truth, just as you requested.                                                 \
          I myself brought him in my fine ship\
          from Scyros, to join well-armed Achaeans.\
          And when we discussed our strategies                                                                \
          around the Trojans\'92 city, I tell you, \
          he was always first to state his own ideas,\
          and when he talked, he never missed the mark.\
          The only ones superior to him\
          were godlike Nestor and myself. And then,\
          on the Trojan plain when we Achaeans fought,\
[660] he never stayed back in the crowds of men                      \
          with ranks of soldiers. No. He ran ahead,\
          far out in front. No man\'92s strength matched his.\
          In fearful battles he killed many men.\
          I can\'92t give you the names of all of them,\
          those he slew while fighting for the Argives.\
          But his sword cut down the son of Telephus,\
          brave Eurypylus. What a man he was!\
          Many of his comrades, the Ceteians,                                                                    \
          were also slaughtered there around him\
[670] because a certain woman wanted gifts.17                                            \
          He was the finest looking man I saw\
          after noble Memnon. And then, when we,\
          the noblest Argives, were climbing in\
          the wooden horse crafted by Epeius,\
          with me in overall command, telling men\
          to open up or close our well-built trap,\
          many other Danaan counsellors\
          and leaders, too, were brushing tears aside,\
          and each man\'92s legs were trembling\'97even then\
[680] my eyes never saw his fair skin grow pale                         \
          or watched him wipe his cheeks to clear off tears.                                  \
          He begged me many times to let him loose,\
          to leave the horse, and he kept reaching for\
          his sword hilt and his spear of heavy bronze.\
          That\'92s how keen he was to kill the Trojans.\
          Once we\'92d ravaged Priam\'92s lofty city,\
          he took his share of loot and a fine prize,\
          when he went to his ship. He was unhurt\'97\
          no blows from sharp bronze spears or other wounds\
[690] from fighting hand-to-hand, the sort one gets                  \
          so frequently in battle. For Ares,\
          when he\'92s angry, does not discriminate.\'92\
          \
          \'93I spoke. Then the shade of swift Achilles\
          moved off with massive strides through meadows\
          filled with asphodel, rejoicing that I\'92d said\
          his son was such a celebrated man.                                                                                       \
          \
          \'93The other shadows of the dead and gone\
          stood there in sorrow, all asking questions\
          about the ones they loved. The only one\
[700] who stood apart was the shade of Ajax,                                                             \
          son of Telamon, still full of anger\
          for my victory, when I\'92d bested him\
          beside our ships, in that competition\
          for Achilles\'92 arms. His honoured mother\
          had offered them as prizes. The judges\
          were sons of Troy and Pallas Athena.18\
          How I wish I\'92d never won that contest!\
          Those weapons were the cause earth swallowed up\
          the life of Ajax, such a splendid man,\
[710] who, in his looks and actions, was the best                                     \
          of all Danaans after the noble son\
          of Peleus. I called to him\'97my words\
          were meant to reassure him:\
          \
          \'91Ajax,\
          worthy son of Telamon, can\'92t you forget,\
          even when you\'92re dead, your anger at me\
          over those destructive weapons?  The gods\
          made them a curse against the Argives,\
          when they lost you, such a tower of strength.\
          Now you\'92ve been killed, Achaeans mourn your death\
[720] unceasingly, just as they do Achilles,                                                      \
          son of Peleus. No one is to blame\
          but Zeus, who in his terrifying rage                                                                       \
          against the army of Danaan spearmen\
          brought on your death. Come over here, my lord,\
          so you can hear me as I talk to you.\
          Let your proud heart and anger now relent.\'92\
          \
          \'93I finished. He did not reply, but left,\
          moving off toward Erebus, to join\
          the other shadows of the dead and gone.\
[730] For all his anger, he would have talked to me,                                           \
          or I to him, but in my chest and heart\
          I wished to see more shades of those who\'92d died.\
          \
          \'93Next I saw Minos, glorious son of Zeus,\
          sitting there, holding a golden sceptre\
          and passing judgments on the dead, who stood\
          and sat around the king, seeking justice,                                                                         \
          throughout the spacious gates of Hades\'92 home.19\
          \
          \'93After him I noticed huge Orion\
          rounding up across a field of asphodel\
[740] wild creatures he himself had hunted down                              \
          in isolated mountains. In his hand,\
          he clutched his still unbreakable bronze club.\
          \
          \'93And I saw Tityus, son of glorious Earth,\
          lying on the ground. His body covered\
          nine acres and more. Two vultures sat there,\
          one on either side, ripping his liver,\
          their beaks jabbing deep inside his guts.\
          His hands could not fend them off his body.\
          He\'92d assaulted Leto, Zeus\'92 lovely wife,                                                                              \
[750] as she was passing through Panopeus,                                                                \
          with its fine dancing grounds, towards Pytho.20\
          \
          \'93Then I saw Tantalus in agony,\
          standing in a pool of water so deep\
          it almost reached his chin. He looked as if\
          he had a thirst but couldn\'92t take a drink.\
          Whenever that old man bent down, so keen\
          to drink, the water there was swallowed up\
          and vanished. You could see black earth appear\
          around his feet. A god dried up the place.\
[760] Some high and leafy trees above his head                                 \
          were in full bloom\'97pears and pomegranates,\
          apple trees\'97all with gleaming fruit\'97sweet figs                                                       \
          and luscious olives. Each time the old man\
          stretched out his arms to reach for them,\
          a wind would raise them to the shadowy clouds.\
          \
          \'93And then, in his painful torment, I saw\
          Sisyphus striving with both hands to raise\
          a massive rock. He\'92d brace his arms and feet,\
          then strain to push it uphill to the top.\
[770] But just as he was going to get that stone                                  \
          across the crest, its overpowering weight\
          would make it change direction. The cruel rock\
          would roll back down again onto the plain.\
          Then he\'92d strain once more to push it up the slope.\
          His limbs dripped sweat, and dust rose from his head.                           \
          \
          \'93And then I noticed mighty Hercules,\
          or at least his image, for he himself\
          was with immortal gods, enjoying their feasts.\
          Hebe with the lovely ankles is his wife,\
[780] daughter of great Zeus and Hera, goddess                                \
          of the golden sandals. Around him there\
          the dead were making noises, like birds\
          fluttering to and fro quite terrified.\
          And like dark night, he was glaring round him,\
          his unsheathed bow in hand, with an arrow\
          on the string, as if prepared to shoot.\
          The strap across his chest was frightening,\
          a golden belt inlaid with images\'97                                                                                         \
          amazing things\'97bears, wild boars, and lions\
[790] with glittering eyes, battles, fights, and murders,                                    \
          men being killed. I hope whoever made it,\
          the one whose skill conceived that belt\'92s design,\
          never made or ever makes another.\
          His eyes saw me and knew just who I was.\
          With a mournful tone he spoke to me\'97\
          his words had wings:\
          \
          \'91Resourceful Odysseus,\
          son of Laertes and a child of Zeus,\
          are you now bearing an unhappy fate\
          below the sunlight, as I, too, did once?\
[800] I was a son of Zeus, son of Cronos,                                                          \
          and yet I had to bear countless troubles,                                                           \
          forced to carry out labours for a man\
          vastly inferior to me, someone\
          who kept assigning me the harshest tasks.\
          Once he sent me here to bring away\
          Hades\'92 hound. There was no other challenge\
          he could dream up more difficult for me\
          than that one. But I carried the dog off\
          and brought him back from Hades with my guides,\
[810] Hermes and gleaming-eyed Athena.\'92                                                     \
          \
          \'93With these words he returned to Hades\'92 home.\
          But I stayed at that place a while, in case\
          one of those heroic men who perished\
          in days gone by might come. I might have seen\
          still more men from former times, the ones                                                                \
          I wished to see\'97Theseus and Perithous,\
          great children of the gods. Before I could,\
          a thousand tribes of those who\'92d died appeared,\
          with an astounding noise. Pale fear gripped me\'97\
[820] holy Persephone might send at me                                           \
          a horrific monster, the Gorgon\'92s head.\
          I quickly made my way back to the ship,\
          told my crew to get themselves on board,\
          and loosen off the cables at the stern.\
          They went aboard at once and took their seats\
          along each rowing bench. A rising swell\
          carried our ship down Oceanus\'92 stream.\
          We rowed at first, but then a fair wind blew.                                                              }