{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf460
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural\qc

\f0\fs24 \cf0 BOOK TWELVE\
The Sirens, Scylla And Charybdis, The Cattle Of The Sun\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural
\cf0           \
[Odysseus continues his story in Phaeacia: the ship sails from Oceanus back to Circe\'92s island where they bury Elpenor; Circe advises Odysseus about future adventures; Odysseus and his crew leave Circe and sail past the Sirens; then they encounter Scylla and Charybdis and lose six men; the ship then sails on to Thrinacia, where the herds and flocks of Helios graze; Odysseus\'92 men swear not to touch the animals; winds keep them on the island; desperate with hunger the crewmen round up some of the animals and kill them; they leave the island, and Zeus sends on a storm as punishment; the boat is destroyed and all of Odysseus\'92 shipmates drown; Odysseus drifts back on a temporary raft to Charybdis, but manages to escape; he reaches Calypso\'92s island; the tale of his past adventures concludes.]\
          \
          \'93Our ship sailed on, away from Ocean\'92s stream,\
          across the great wide sea, and reached Aeaea,\
          the island home and dancing grounds of Dawn.1\
          We sailed in, hauled our ship up on the beach,\
          then walked along the shore beside the sea.\
          There, waiting for bright Dawn, we fell asleep.\
          \
          \'93As soon as rose-fingered early Dawn appeared,\
          I sent my comrades off to Circe\'92s house\
          to fetch the body of the dead Elpenor.                                                                              \
  [10] Then, after quickly cutting down brush wood,                                           \
          we buried him where the land extended\
          furthest out to sea. Overcome with grief,\
          we shed many tears. After we had burned\
          the dead man\'92s corpse and armour, we piled up\
          a mound, raised a pillar, then planted there,\
          above the mound, his finely fashioned oar.\
          \
          \'93While we were occupied with all these tasks,\
          Circe was well aware of our return\
          from Hades\'92 home. Dressed in her finery,\
  [20] she quickly came to us. With her she brought                           \
          servants carrying bread, plenty of meat,\
          and bright red wine. Then the lovely goddess\
          stood in our midst and spoke to us:                                                                                      \
          \
          \'91You reckless men,\
          you\'92ve gone to Hades\'92 home while still alive,\
          to meet death twice, when other men die once.\
          But come, eat this food and drink this wine.\
          Take all day. As soon as Dawn arrives,\
          you\'92ll sail. I\'92ll show you your course and tell you\
          each sign to look for, so you\'92ll not suffer,\
  [30] or, thanks to vicious plans of sea and land,                                     \
          endure great pain.\'92\
          \
          \'93Circe finished speaking.\
          And our proud hearts agreed with what she\'92d said.\
          So all that day until the sun went down\
          we sat there eating rich supplies of meat                                                                         \
          and drinking down sweet wine. The sun then set,\
          and darkness came. So we lay down and slept\
          beside stern cables of our ship. But Circe\
          took me by the hand and led me off,\
          some distance from the crew. She made me sit,\
  [40] while she lay there on the ground beside me.                                             \
          I told her every detail of our trip,                                           \
          describing all of it from start to finish.\
          Then queen Circe spoke to me and said:\
          \
          \'91All these things have thus come to an end.\
          But you must listen now to what I say\'97\
          a god himself will be reminding you.\
          First of all, you\'92ll run into the Sirens.\
          They seduce all men who come across them.                                               \
          Whoever unwittingly goes past them\
  [50] and hears the Sirens\'92 call never gets back.                                         \
          His wife and infant children in his home\
          will never stand beside him full of joy.\
          No. Instead, the Sirens\'92 clear-toned song\
          will captivate his heart. They\'92ll be sitting\
          in a meadow, surrounded by a pile,\
          a massive heap, of rotting human bones\
          encased in shriveled skin. Row on past them.\
          Roll some sweet wax in your hand and stuff it\
          in your companions\'92 ears, so none of them\
  [60] can listen. But if you\'92re keen to hear them,                                     \
          make your crew tie you down in your swift ship.                                     \
          Stand there with hands and feet lashed to the mast.\
          They must attach the rope ends there as well.\
          Then you can hear both Sirens as they sing.\
          You\'92ll enjoy their song. If you start to beg\
          your men, or order them, to let you go,\
          make sure they lash you there with still more rope.\
          When your crew has rowed on past the Sirens,\
          I cannot tell you which alternative\
  [70] to follow on your route\'97for you yourself                         \
          will have to trust your heart. But I\'92ll tell you\
          the options. One has overhanging rocks,\
          on which dark-eyed Amphitrite\'92s great waves                                              \
          smash with a roar. These cliffs the blessed gods\
          have called the Planctae. No birds pass through there,\
          not even timid doves who bring ambrosia\
          to father Zeus. The sheer rock precipice\
          snatches even these away. And then Zeus\
          sends out another to maintain their count.\
  [80] No human ship has ever reached this place                      \
          and got away. Instead, waves from the sea\
          and deadly blasts of fire carry away\
          a whirling mass of timbers from the boat\
          and human bodies. Only one ocean ship,\
          most famous of them all, has made it through,\
          the Argo, sailing on her way from Aeetes,                                                       \
          and waves would soon have smashed that vessel, too,\
          against the massive rocks, had not Hera\
          sent her through. For Jason was her friend.2\
  [90] On the other route there are two cliffs.                                                \
          One has a sharp peak jutting all the way\
          up to wide heaven. Around that mountain\
          a dark cloud sits, which never melts away.\
          No blue sky ever shows around the peak,\
          not even in summer or at harvest time.\
          No human being could climb up that rock\
          and stand on top, not even if he had\
          twenty hands and feet. The cliff\'92s too smooth,\
          like polished stone. Half way up the rock face                                            \
[100] there\'92s a shadowy cave. It faces west,                                                     \
          towards Erebus. You\'92ll steer your ship at it,\
          illustrious Odysseus. There\'92s no man\
          powerful enough to shoot an arrow\
          from a hollow ship and reach that cavern.\
          In there lives Scylla. She has a dreadful yelp.\
          It\'92s true her voice sounds like a new-born pup,\
          but she\'92s a vicious monster. Nobody\
          would feel good seeing her, nor would a god\
          who crossed her path. She has a dozen feet,\
[110] all deformed, six enormously long necks,                                                   \
          with a horrific head on each of them,\
          and three rows of teeth packed close together,\
          full of murky death. Her lower body\
          she keeps out of sight in her hollow cave,\
          but sticks her heads outside the fearful hole,\
          and fishes there, scouring around the rock\
          for dolphins, swordfish, or some bigger prey,\
          whatever she can seize of all those beasts\
          moaning Amphitrite keeps nourishing\
[120] in numbers past all counting. No sailors                           \
          can yet boast they and their ship sailed past her\
          without getting hurt. Each of Scylla\'92s heads\
          carries off a man, snatching him away                                                                \
          right off the dark-prowed ship. Then, Odysseus,\
          you\'92ll see the other cliff. It\'92s not so high.\
          The two are close together. You could shoot\
          an arrow from one cliff and hit the other.\
          There\'92s a huge fig tree there with leaves in bloom.\
          Just below that tree divine Charybdis\
[130] sucks black water down. She spews it out                         \
          three times a day, and then three times a day\
          she gulps it down\'97a terrifying sight.\
          May you never meet her when she swallows!\
          Nothing can save you from destruction then,\
          not even Poseidon, Shaker of the Earth.\
          Make sure your ship stays close to Scylla\'92s rock.\
          Row past there quickly. It\'92s much better\
          to mourn for six companions in your ship                                                       \
          than to have all of them wiped out together.\'92\
          \
[140] \'93Circe paused. I answered her directly:                                                              \
          \
          \'91Goddess, please tell me this, and speak the truth\'97\
          is there some way I can get safely through,\
          past murderous Charybdis, and protect\
          me and my crew when Scylla moves to strike.\'92\
          \
          \'93I spoke. The lovely goddess then replied:\
          \
          \'91You reckless man, you think you\'92re dealing here\
          with acts of war or work? Why won\'92t you yield\
          to the immortal gods? She\'92s not human,\
          but a destroyer who will never die\'97\
[150] fearful, difficult, and fierce\'97not someone                       \
          you can fight. There\'92s no defence against her.\
          The bravest thing to do is run away.                                                                      \
          If you linger by the cliff to arm yourself,\
          I fear she\'92ll jump out once more, attack you\
          with all her heads and snatch away six men,\
          just as before. Row on quickly past her,\
          as hard as you can go. Send out a call\
          to Crataiis, her mother, who bore her\
          to menace human beings. She\'92ll restrain her\'97\
[160] Scylla\'92s heads won\'92t lash out at you again.                                        \
          Next you\'92ll reach the island of Thrinacia,\
          where Helios\'92 many cattle graze,\
          his rich flocks, too\'97seven herds of cattle\
          and just as many lovely flocks of sheep,\
          with fifty in each group. They bear no young                                               \
          and never die. Their herders are divine,\
          fair-haired nymphs Lampetie and Phaethusa.\
          Beautiful Neaera gave birth to them\
          from Helios Hyperion, god of the sun.\
[170] Once she\'92d raised them, their royal mother                      \
          sent them off to live on Thrinacia,\
          an island far away, where they could tend\
          their father\'92s sheep and bent-horned cattle.\
          Now, if you leave these animals unharmed\
          and focus on your journey home, I think\
          you may get back to Ithaca, although\
          you\'92ll bear misfortunes. But if you harm them,\
          then I foresee destruction for your ship\
          and crew. Even if you yourself escape,                                                                \
[180] you\'92ll get back home in great distress and late,                           \
          after all your comrades have been killed.\'92\
          \
          \'93Circe finished speaking. When Dawn came up\
          on her golden throne, the lovely goddess\
          left to go up island. So I returned\
          back to the ship and urged my comrades\
          to get on board and loosen off the stern ropes.\
          They quickly climbed into the ship, sat down\
          in proper order at each rowing bench,\
          and struck the gray sea with their oars. Fair winds\
[190] began to blow behind our dark-prowed ship,                                              \
          filling the sail, excellent companions\
          sent by fair-haired Circe, fearful goddess                                                                        \
          who possessed the power of song. We checked out\
          the rigging on our ship and then sat down.\
          The wind and helmsman kept us on our course.\
          Then, with an aching heart, I addressed my crew:\
          \
          \'91Friends, it\'92s not right that only one or two\
          should know the prophecies revealed to me\
          by the lovely goddess Circe. And so,\
[200] I\'92ll tell you all\'97once we understand them,                                      \
          we may either die or ward off Death and Fate\
          and then escape. She told me first of all\
          we should guard against the wondrous voices\
          of the Sirens in their flowery meadows.\
          She said I alone should listen to them.                                                                \
          But you must tie me down with cruel bonds,\
          so I stay where I am and cannot move,\
          standing upright at the mast. You must fix\
          the rope at both its ends onto the mast.\
[210] If I start ordering you to set me free,                                                     \
          you have to tie me down with still more rope.\'92\
          \
          \'93I reviewed these things in every detail,\
          informing my companions. Our strong ship,\
          with a fair wind still driving us ahead,\
          came quickly to the island of the Sirens.\
          Then the wind died down. Everything was calm,\
          without a breeze. Some god had stilled the waves.\
          My comrades stood up, furled the sail, stowed it                                                     \
          in the hollow ship, and then sat at their oars,\
[220] churning the water white with polished blades                         \
          carved out of pine. With my sharp sword I cut\
          a large round chunk of wax into small bits,\
          then kneaded them in my strong fingers.\
          This pressure and the rays of Helios,\
          lord Hyperion, made the wax grow warm.\
          Once I\'92d  plugged my comrades\'92 ears with wax,\
          they tied me hand and foot onto the ship,\
          so I stood upright hard against the mast.\
          They lashed the rope ends to the mast as well,\
[230] then sat and struck the gray sea with their oars.                                               \
          But when we were about as far away\
          as a man can shout, moving forward quickly,\
          our swift ship did not get past the Sirens,\
          once it came in close, without being noticed.\
          So they began their clear-toned cry:\
          \
          \'91Odysseus,\
          you famous man, great glory of Achaeans,\
          come over here. Let your ship pause awhile,\
          so you can hear the songs we two will sing.  \
          No man has ever rowed in his black ship\
[240] past this island and not listened to us,                                                  \
          sweet-voiced melodies sung from our lips.\
          That brings him joy, and he departs from here\
          a wiser man, for we two understand\
          all the things that went on there in Troy,\
          all Trojan and Achaean suffering,                                                                            \
          thanks to what the gods then willed, for we know\
          everything that happens on this fertile earth.\'92\
          \
          \'93They paused. The voice that reached me was so fine\
          my heart longed to listen. I told my crew\
[250] to set me free, sent them clear signals                                      \
          with my eyebrows. But they fell to the oars\
          and rowed ahead. Then two of them got up,\
          Perimedes and Eurylochus, bound me\
          with more rope and lashed me even tighter.\
          Once they\'92d rowed on well beyond the Sirens,\
          my loyal crewmates quickly pulled out wax\
          I\'92d stuffed in each man\'92s ears and loosed my ropes.                                             \
          \
          \'93But once we\'92d left the island far behind,\
          I saw giant waves and smoke. Then I heard\
[260] a crashing roar. The men were terrified.                                                          \
          The oars were snatched away, out of their hands,\
          and banged each other in the swirling sea.\
          Once they were no longer pulling hard\
          on their tapered oars, the boat stopped moving.\
          I went through the ship, cheering up the crew,\
          standing beside each man and speaking words\
          of reassurance:\
          \
          \'91Friends, up to this point,\
          we\'92ve not been strangers to misfortunes.\
          Surely the bad things now are nothing worse\
[270] than when the Cyclops with his savage force                             \
          kept us his prisoners in his hollow cave.\
          But even there, thanks to my excellence,\
          intelligence, and planning, we escaped.\
          I think someday we\'92ll be remembering\
          these dangers, too. But come now, all of us\
          should follow what I say. Stay by your oars,\
          and keep striking them against the surging sea.\
          Zeus may somehow let us escape from here\
          and thus avoid destruction. You, helmsman,\
[280] I\'92m talking, above all, to you, so hold                               \
          this in your heart\'97you control the steering\
          on this hollow ship. Keep us on a course\
          some distance from the smoke and breaking waves.\
          Hug the cliff, in case, before you know it,                                                       \
          our ship veers over to the other side,\
          and you throw us all into disaster.\'92\
          \
          \'93I spoke. They quickly followed what I\'92d said.\
          I didn\'92t speak a word of Scylla\'97she was\
          a threat for which there was no remedy\'97\
[290] in case my comrades, overcome with fear,                                                    \
          might stop rowing and huddle together\
          inside the boat. At that point I forgot\
          Circe\'92s hard command, when she\'92d ordered me\
          not to arm myself. After I\'92d put on\
          my splendid armour, I took two long spears\
          and moved up to the foredeck of the ship,\
          where, it seemed to me, I could see Scylla                                                                      \
          as soon as she appeared up on the rock\
          and brought disaster down on my companions.\
[300] I couldn\'92t catch a glimpse of her at all.                                                               \
          My eyes grew weary as I searched for her\
          all around that misty rock. We sailed on,\
          up the narrow strait, groaning as we moved.\
          On one side lay Scylla; on the other one\
          divine Charybdis terrified us all,\
          by swallowing salt water from the sea.\
          When she spewed it out, she seethed and bubbled\
          uncontrollably, just like a cauldron\
          on a massive fire, while high above our heads\
[310] spray was falling on top of both the cliffs.                                                      \
          When she sucked the salt sea water down,                                                                    \
          everything in there looked totally confused,\
          a dreadful roar arose around the rocks,\
          and underneath the dark and sandy ground\
          was visible. Pale fear gripped my crewmen.\
          When we saw Charybdis, we were afraid\
          we\'92d be destroyed. Then Scylla snatched away\
          six of my companions, right from the ship,\
          the strongest and the bravest men I had.\
[320] When I turned to watch the swift ship and crew,                                     \
          already I could see their hands and feet,\
          as Scylla carried them high overhead.\
          They cried out and screamed, calling me by name\
          one final time, their hearts in agony.                                                                                  \
          Just as an angler on a jutting rock\
          casts out some bait with his long pole to snare\
          small fish and lets the horn from some field ox\
          sink down in the sea, then, when he snags one,\
          throws it quivering on shore, that\'92s how those men\
[330] wriggled as they were raised towards the rocks.3                                      \
          Then, in the entrance to her cave, Scylla\
          devoured the men, who still kept screaming,\
          stretching out their arms in my direction,\
          as they met their painful deaths. Of all things\
          my eyes have witnessed in my journeying\
          on pathways of the sea, the sight of them\
          was the most piteous I\'92ve ever seen.\
          \
          \'93Once we\'92d made it past those rocks and fled,                                                           \
          escaping Scylla and dread Charybdis,\
[340] we reached the lovely island of the god,                                                           \
          home of those splendid broad-faced cattle\
          and numerous rich flocks belonging to\
          Helios Hyperion, god of the sun.\
          While I was still at sea in my black ship,\
          I heard the lowing cattle being penned\
          and bleating sheep. There fell into my heart\
          the speeches of Teiresias of Thebes,\
          the sightless prophet\'97Circe\'92s words, as well,\
          on Aeaea. They had both strictly charged\
[350] that I should at all costs miss this island,                                                          \
          the property of Helios, who brings\
          such joy to men. So with a heavy heart,                                                                            \
          I spoke to my companions:\
          \
          \'91Comrades,\
          though you have endured a lot of trouble,\
          hear what I have to say, so I can speak\
          about the prophecies Teiresias made\
          and Circe, too, on Aeaea. They both\
          strictly charged me to avoid this island,\
          which Helios owns, who gives men such joy.\
[360] Here, she said, we face our gravest danger.                                     \
          So row our black ship past this island.\'92\
          \
          \'93I paused. The spirit in my crew was shattered.\
          Then Eurylochus answered me. His words\
          were full of spite:\
          \
          \'91You\'92re a hard man,\
          Odysseus, with more strength than other men.\
          Your limbs are never weary. One would think                                            \
          you were composed entirely of iron,\
          if you refuse to let your shipmates land,\
          when they\'92re worn out with work and lack of sleep.\
[370] Here on this sea-girt island, we could make                     \
          a tasty dinner. You tell us instead\
          to wander on like this through the swift night.\
          But harsh winds which destroy men\'92s ships arise\
          out of the night. And how could we avoid\
          total disaster, if we chance to meet\
          unexpected blasts from stormy South Wind\
          or from blustering West Wind, the ones\
          most likely to completely wreck our ship,\
          no matter what the ruling gods may wish?                                                      \
[380] Surely we should let black night persuade us,                                 \
          and now prepare a meal, while we stay put\
          alongside our swift ship. When morning comes,\
          we\'92ll go on board, set off on the wide sea.\'92\
          \
          \'93Eurylochus spoke. My other comrades\
          all agreed. So then I understood too well\
          some god was planning trouble. I replied\'97\
          my words had wings:\
          \
          \'91It seems, Eurylochus,\
          you\'92re forcing me to stand alone. But come,\
          let all of you now swear this solemn oath\'97\
[390] if by chance we find a herd of cattle                                  \
          or a large flock of sheep, not one of you                                                          \
          will be so overcome with foolishness\
          that you\'92ll kill a cow or sheep. No. Instead,\
          you\'92ll be content to eat the food supplies\
          which goddess Circe gave.\'92\
          \
          \'93Once I\'92d said this,\
          they swore, as I had asked, they\'92d never kill\
          those animals. When they had made the oath\
          and finished promising, we moved our ship\
          inside a hollow harbour, by a spring\
[400] whose water tasted sweet. Then my crewmen                          \
          disembarked and made a skilful dinner.\
          When everyone had eaten food and drunk\
          to his heart\'92s ease, they wept as they recalled\
          those dear companions Scylla snatched away\
          out of the hollow ship and then devoured.                                                                     \
          As they cried there, sweet sleep came over them.\
          \
          \'93But when three-quarters of the night had passed\
          and the stars had shifted their positions,\
          cloud-gatherer Zeus stirred up a nasty wind\
[410] and an amazing storm, which hid in clouds                              \
          both land and sea alike. And from heaven\
          the night rushed down. Once rose-fingered Dawn arrived,\
          we dragged up our ship and made it secure\
          inside a hollow cave, a place nymphs used\
          as a fine dancing and assembly ground.\
          Then I called a meeting of the men and said:\
          \
          \'91My friends, in our ship we have meat and drink,                                   \
          so let\'92s not touch those cattle, just in case\
          that causes trouble for us. For these cows\
[420] and lovely sheep belong to Helios,                                                           \
          a fearful god, who spies out all there is\
          and listens in on everything as well.\'92\
          \
          \'93These words of mine won over their proud hearts.\
          But then South Wind kept blowing one whole month.\
          It never stopped. No other wind sprang up,\
          except those times when East or South Wind blew.\
          As long as the men had red wine and bread,\
          they didn\'92t touch the cattle. They were keen\
          to stay alive. But once what we had stored\
[430] inside our ship was gone, they had to roam,                                                \
          scouring around for game and fish and birds,                                                            \
          whatever came to hand. They used bent hooks\
          to fish, while hunger gnawed their stomachs.\
          At that point I went inland, up island,\
          to pray to the gods, hoping one of them\
          would show me a way home. Once I\'92d moved\
          across the island, far from my comrades,\
          I washed my hands in a protected spot,\
          a shelter from the wind, and said my prayers\
[440] to all the gods who hold Mount Olympus.                                                      \
          Then they poured sweet sleep across my eyelids.\
          Meanwhile Eurylochus began to give\
          disastrous advice to my companions:\
          \
          \'91Shipmates, although you\'92re suffering distress,                                            \
          hear me out. For wretched human beings\
          all forms of death are hateful. But to die\
          from lack of food, to meet one\'92s fate that way,\
          is worst of all. So come, let\'92s drive away\
          the best of Helios\'92 cattle, and then\
[450] we\'92ll sacrifice to the immortal gods                                   \
          who hold wide heaven. And if we get home,\
          make it to Ithaca, our native land,\
          for Helios Hyperion we\'92ll build\
          a splendid temple, and inside we\'92ll put\
          many wealthy offerings. If he\'92s enraged\
          about his straight-horned cattle and desires\
          to wreck our ship and other gods agree,\
          I\'92d rather lose my life once and for all                                                                \
          choking on a wave than starving to death\
          on an abandoned island.\'92\
          \
[460] \'93Eurylochus spoke.                              \
          My other comrades agreed with what he\'92d said.\
          They quickly rounded up the finest beasts\
          from Helios\'92 herd, which was close by,\
          sleek, broad-faced animals with curving horns\
          grazing near the dark-prowed ship. My comrades\
          stood around them, praying to the gods.\
          They broke off tender leaves from a high oak,\
          for there was no white barley on the ship.4\
          After their prayers, they cut the creature\'92s throats,\
[470] flayed them, and cut out portions of the thighs.                                       \
          These they covered in a double layer of fat                                                                   \
          and laid raw meat on top. They had no wine\
          to pour down on the flaming sacrifice,\
          so they used some water for libations\
          and roasted all the entrails in the fire.\
          Once the thigh parts were completely roasted\
          and they\'92d had a taste of inner organs,\
          they sliced up the rest and skewered it on spits.\
          That was the moment sweet sleep left my eyes.\
[480] I went down to our swift ship by the shore.                                                   \
          As I drew closer to our curving ship,\
          the sweet smell of hot fat floated round me.\
          I groaned and cried out to immortal gods:                                                                     \
          \
          \'91Father Zeus and you other sacred gods,\
          who live forever, you forced it on me,\
          that cruel sleep, to bring about my doom.\
          For my companions who remained behind\
          have planned something disastrous.\'92\
          \
          \'93A messenger\
          quickly came to Helios Hyperion,\
[490] long-robed Lampetie, bringing him the news\'97                       \
          we had killed his cattle. Without delay,\
          he spoke to the immortals, full of rage:\
          \
          \'91Father Zeus and you other blessed gods,\
          who live forever, take your vengeance now\
          on those companions of Odysseus,\
          Laertes\'92 son, who, in their arrogance,\
          have killed my animals, the very ones\
          I always look upon with such delight                                                                    \
          whenever I move up to starry heaven\
[500] and then turn back from there toward the earth.                      \
          If they don\'92t pay me proper retribution\
          for those beasts, then I\'92ll go down to Hades\
          and shine among the dead.\'92\
          \
          \'93Cloud-gatherer Zeus\
          answered him and said:\
          \
          \'91Helios, I think\
          you should keep on shining for immortals\
          and for human beings on fertile earth.\
          With a dazzling thunderbolt I myself\
          will quickly strike at that swift ship of theirs\
          and, in the middle of the wine-dark sea,\
          smash it to tiny pieces.\'92\
          \
[510] \'93I learned of this                       \
          from fair Calypso, who said she herself                                                                             \
          had heard it from Hermes the Messenger.\
          \
          \'93I came down to the sea and reached the ship.\
          Then I bitterly attacked my crewmen,\
          each of them in turn, standing by the boat.\
          But we couldn\'92t find a single remedy\'97\
          the cattle were already dead. The gods\
          immediately sent my men bad omens\'97\
          hides crept along the ground, while on the spits\
[520] the meat began to bellow, and a sound                                    \
          like cattle lowing filled the air.\
          \
          \'93For six days,\
          those comrades I had trusted feasted there,\
          eating the cattle they had rounded up,\
          the finest beasts in Helios\'92 herd.\
          But when Zeus, son of Cronos, brought to us\
          the seventh day, the stormy winds died down.                                                          \
          We went aboard at once, put up the mast,\
          hoisted the white sail, and then set off,\
          out on the wide sea\
          \
          \'93Once we\'92d left that island,\
[530] no other land appeared, only sky and sea.                                                     \
          The son of Cronos sent us a black cloud,\
          above our hollow ship, while underneath\
          the sea grew dark. Our boat sailed on its course,\
          but not for long. All at once, West Wind whipped up\
          a frantic storm\'97the blasts of wind snapped off\
          both forestays on the mast, which then fell back,                                                   \
          and all our rigging crashed down in the hold.\
          In the stern part of the ship, the falling mast\
          struck the helmsman on his head, caving in\
[540] his skull, every bone at once. Then he fell,                                                    \
          like a diver, off the ship. His proud spirit\
          left his bones. Then Zeus roared out his thunder\
          and with a bolt of lightning struck our ship.\
          The blow from Zeus\'92 lightning made our boat\
          shiver from stem to stern and filled it up\
          with sulphurous smoke. My crew fell overboard\
          and were carried in the waves, like cormorants,\
          around our blackened ship, because the god\
          had robbed them of their chance to get back home.\
          \
[550] \'93But I kept pacing up and down the ship,                                                                \
          until the breaking seas had loosened off\
          both sides of the keel. Waves were holding up\
          the shattered ship but then snapped off the mast\
          right at the keel. But the ox-hide backstay\
          had fallen over it, and so with that\
          I lashed them both together, mast and keel.\
          I sat on these and then was carried off\
          by those destructive winds. But when the storms\
          from West Wind ceased, South Wind began to blow,\
[560] and that distressed my spirit\'97I worried                                   \
          about floating back to grim Charybdis.\
          All night I drifted. When the sun came up,\
          I reached Scylla\'92s cliff and dread Charybdis                                                                   \
          sucking down salt water from the sea.\
          But I jumped up into the high fig tree\
          and held on there, as if I were a bat.\
          But there was nowhere I could plant my feet,\
          nor could I climb the tree\'97its roots were spread\
          far down below me, and its branches stretched\
[570] above me, out of reach, immense and long,                                                \
          overshadowing Charybdis. I hung there,\
          staunch in my hope that when she spewed again,\
          she\'92d throw up keel and mast. And to my joy\
          they finally appeared. Just at the hour\
          a man gets up for dinner from assembly,\
          one who adjudicates the many quarrels                                                                            \
          young men have, who then seek judgment,\
          that\'92s when those timbers first came into view\
          out from Charybdis.5 My hands and feet let go\
[580] and from up high I fell into the sea                                           \
          beyond those lengthy spars. I sat on them\
          and used my hands to paddle my way through.\
          As for Scylla, the father of gods and men\
          would not let her catch sight of me again,\
          or else I\'92d not have managed to escape\
          being utterly destroyed.\
          \
          \'93From that place\
          I drifted for nine days. On the tenth night,\
          the gods conducted me to Ogygia,\
          the island where fair-haired Calypso lives,\
[590] fearful goddess with the power of song.                                                            \
          She welcomed and took good care of me.                                                                      \
          But why should I tell you that story now?\
          It was only yesterday, in your home,\
          I told it to you and your noble wife.\
          And it\'92s an irritating thing, I think,\
          to re-tell a story once it\'92s clearly told.}