{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf460
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural\qc

\f0\fs24 \cf0 BOOK THIRTEEN\
Odysseus Leaves Phaeacia and Reaches Ithaca\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural
\cf0           \
[Odysseus ends his story; the Phaeacians collect gifts and store them on a ship; Odysseus takes his leave and goes on board, where he sleeps during the voyage to Ithaca; the Phaeacians land in Ithaca, unload the goods, place Odysseus sleeping on the shore, and leave; Poseidon complains to Zeus about the Phaeacians\'92 transporting Odysseus safely home; Poseidon decides to turn the Phaeacian ship to stone and put up a mountain range around their city; the Phaeacians are amazed at the transformation of their ship; Alcinous recalls his father\'92s prophecies; the Phaeacians sacrifice to Poseidon; Odysseus wakes up on Ithaca but does not recognize the place; Athena visits him in the form of a young man; she tells him he is in Ithaca; Odysseus fabricates a story about his identity; Athena transforms herself into a woman, reveals her identity, and points out the features of the island; the two of them plan how Odysseus will take his revenge on the suitors; Athena transforms his appearance so that he looks like an impoverished old beggar; she tells him to seek out the man who tends his swine; Athena leaves for Sparta to fetch Telemachus]  \
          \
          Odysseus paused. All Phaeacians sat in silence,\
          without saying a word, spellbound in the shadowy hall.\
          Then Alcinous again spoke up and said to him:\
          \
          \'93Odysseus, since you\'92re visiting my home,\
          with its brass floors and high-pitched roof, I think\
          you won\'92t leave here and go back disappointed,\
          although you\'92ve truly suffered much bad luck.\
          And now I\'92ll speak to all men present here,\
          those who in this hall are always drinking\
  [10] the council\'92s gleaming wine and enjoying                                \
          the songs the minstrel sings. I tell you this.\
          Clothing for our guest is packed already,                                                                        \
          stored in a polished chest inlaid with gold,\
          as well as all the other gifts brought here\
          by Phaeacia\'92s counsellors. But come now,\
          let\'92s give him a large tripod and a cauldron,\
          each one of us. We can repay ourselves\'97\
          we\'92ll get the people to provide the cost.\
          It\'92s too expensive for one man to give\
  [20] without receiving any money back.\'94                                                                    \
          \
          Alcinous spoke. And they agreed with what he\'92d said.\
          Then they all left to go back home and get some rest.\
          \
          But as soon as rose-fingered early Dawn appeared,\
          they hurried to the ship and loaded on the bronze,\
          which strengthens men. Strong and mighty Alcinous                                                      \
          went in person through the ship and had the gifts\
          stowed below the benches, where they wouldn\'92t hinder\
          any of the crewmen, as they plied their oars.\
          Then they went back to Alcinous\'92 home to feast.\
          \
  [30] On their behalf, strong and mighty Alcinous                                    \
          sacrificed a bull to Zeus, god of the dark cloud\
          and son of Cronos, who rules over everything.\
          Once they\'92d burned pieces of the thigh, they then enjoyed\
          a splendid banquet. Among them Demodocus,\
          the godlike minstrel honoured by his people,\
          sang a song of celebration. But Odysseus\
          kept on turning round toward the blazing sunlight,\
          keen to see it set\'97he so wanted to return.                                                                                \
          Just as a man longs for supper, when all day long\
  [40] a pair of wine-dark oxen pull a well-made plough                           \
          through fallow land for him, and as the sun goes down,\
          the sight delights him\'97now he can prepare a meal,\
          for his knees are tired when he moves\'97that\'92s how\
          Odysseus rejoiced to see the sunlight disappear.\
          He spoke up at once, addressing the Phaeacians,\
          men who love the oar, and especially Alcinous,\
          saying these words:\
          \
          \'93Lord Alcinous, of all men\
          most renowned, pour out your libations now,\
          and send me safely off. Farewell to you!\
  [50] Now everything my dear heart once desired                                       \
          has come about\'97an escort and these gifts,\
          marks of friendship. And may the heavenly gods\
          make me content with them. When I get back,\
          may I find my excellent wife at home,\
          with all my family safe. And as for you,\
          may you stay here and make a happy life\
          for the wives you married and your children.\
          May gods grant you success of every kind,\
          and may no evil things afflict your people.\'94\
          \
  [60] Odysseus spoke. They all approved of what he\'92d said,                                    \
          and ordered that their guest should be escorted off,\
          because he\'92d spoken well. Then mighty Alcinous\
          addressed the herald, saying:\
          \
          \'93Pontonous,                                                          \
          stir the mixing bowl, and serve out the wine\
          to all those in the hall, so once we\'92ve prayed\
          to Father Zeus, we may send off our guest,\
          back to his native land.\'94\
          \
          Alcinous finished speaking.\
          Pontonous mixed wine sweet as honey, then served it round\
          to all of them, coming up to everyone in turn,\
  [70] and, from where they sat, they poured libations                              \
          to all the blessed gods who hold wide heaven.\
          Lord Odysseus stood up, placed a two-handled cup\
          in Arete\'92s hands, and spoke winged words to her:\
          \
          \'93Fare you well, O queen, through all your years,\
          until old age and death arrive, the fate                                                                              \
          of every human being. I\'92m leaving now.\
          But in this house may you have much delight\
          from your own children and your people,\
          and from Alcinous, the king.\'94\
          \
          Lord Odysseus spoke,\
  [80] then moved across the threshold. Mighty Alcinous                           \
          dispatched a herald to conduct him to the sea\
          and his fast ship. Arete sent slave girls with him.\
          One held a freshly laundered cloak and tunic.\
          She told a second one to follow on behind\
          escorting the large trunk. Another female slave\
          brought red wine and bread. Once they\'92d come down to the ship,                    \
          beside the sea, the noble youths accompanying him\
          immediately took all the food and drink on board\
          and stowed them in the hollow ship. They spread a rug\
  [90] and linen sheet on the deck inside the hollow ship,                                          \
          at the stern, so Odysseus could sleep in peace. \
          He went aboard, as well, and lay down in silence.\
          Each man sat in proper order at his oarlock.\
          They loosed the cable from the perforated stone.\
          Once they leaned back and stirred the water with their oars,\
          a calming sleep fell on his eyelids, undisturbed\
          and very sweet, something very similar to death.                                                                \
          Just as four stallions yoked together charge ahead\
          across the plain, all running underneath the lash,\
[100] and jump high as they gallop quickly on their way,                                           \
          that\'92s how the stern of that ship leapt up on high,\
          while in her wake the dark waves of the roaring sea\
          were churned to a great foam, as she sped on her path,\
          safe and secure. Not even a wheeling hawk,\
          the swiftest of all flying things, could match her speed,\
          as she raced ahead, slicing through the ocean waves,\
          carrying a man whose mind was like a god\'92s.\
          His heart in earlier days had endured much pain,                                                               \
          as he moved through men\'92s wars and suffered on the waves.\
[110] Now he slept in peace, forgetting all his troubles.                                               \
          \
          When the brightest of the stars rose up, the one\
          which always comes to herald light from early Dawn,\
          the sea-faring ship sailed in close to Ithaca.\
          Now, in that land, Phorcys, the Old Man of the Sea,\
          has his harbour.1  Two jutting headlands at its mouth\
          drop off on the seaward side, but on the other,\
          slope down to the cove and keep the place protected\
          from huge waves whipped up by stormy winds at sea.\
          In there well-timbered ships can ride without being moored,                                 \
[120] once they reach that anchorage. An olive tree                                  \
          with long pointed leaves stands at the harbour head,\
          and close beside it there\'92s a pleasant shadowy cave,\
          sacred to the nymphs whom people call the Naiads.2  \
          Mixing bowls and jars of stone are stored inside,\
          and bees make honey there. The cave has long stone looms \
          where nymphs weave cloth with a deep sea-purple dye, \
          an amazing thing to see. In there, too, are springs\
          which always flow. The cave has two entrances\'97\
          one, which faces North Wind, is the one men use                                                              \
[130] to go inside; the other one, which faces South Wind,                                      \
          is divine\'97human beings may not go in there,\
          for the pathway is confined to the immortals.\
          \
          They rowed in here, a place they knew about before.\
          Those rowers\'92 arms had so much strength, half the boat,\
          which was moving fast, was driven up on shore.\
          Once they climbed out of that well-built rowing ship\
          onto dry land, first they took Odysseus out,\
          lifting him from the hollow ship still wrapped up\
          in the linen sheet and splendid blanket, placed him,\
[140] fast asleep, down on the sand, then carried out                               \
          the gifts Phaeacia\'92s noblemen had given him,                                                                         \
          thanks to the goodwill of great-hearted Athena,\
          when he was setting out for home. They put these gifts\
          against the trunk of the olive tree, in a pile, \
          some distance from the path, in case someone came by,\
          before Odysseus could wake up, stumbled on them,\
          and robbed him. Then they set off, back to Phaeacia.\
          \
          But the Shaker of the Earth had not forgotten\
          those threats he\'92d once made against godlike Odysseus.\
          So he asked Zeus what plan he had in mind:\
          \
[150] \'93Father Zeus,                                        \
          the immortal gods will honour me no more,\
          for these men pay me no respect at all,\
          these Phaeacians, who, as you well know,                                                                      \
          are my descendants.3 For I clearly said\
          Odysseus should suffer much misfortune\
          before he made it home. I\'92d not rob him\
          of his return completely, once you\'92d made\
          that promise and confirmed it with a nod.\
          But these men carried him, while still asleep,\
[160] over the sea in their swift ship, set him                                     \
          in Ithaca, and gave him countless gifts\'97\
          bronze and gold and piles of woven clothing,\
          more than Odysseus ever would have got\
          at Troy, if he\'92d come safely back, bringing\
          his fair share of the trophies with him.\'94\
          \
          Cloud-gatherer Zeus then gave Poseidon this reply:\
          \
          \'93Mighty Earthshaker, what strange things you say!                                                \
          The gods aren\'92t treating you with disrespect.\
          To heap dishonour on the oldest and the best\
[170] would be hard to bear. But if any man,                                                             \
          seduced by his own force and power,\
          fails to honour you somehow, it\'92s up to you\
          to take vengeance later. Do what you want,\
          what gives your heart delight.\'94\
          \
          Earthshaker Poseidon\
          then answered Zeus:\
          \
          \'93Lord of the Dark Cloud,\
          I would have quickly done as you\'92ve just said,\
          but I was afraid you might be angry,\
          and that I wanted to avoid. But now, \
          I wish to strike at those Phaeacians,\
[180] at their splendid ship, as it sails back home,                                                         \
          after its trip across the misty seas,\
          so they will stop and never more provide\
          an escort carrying human beings. \
          Then all around their city I\'92ll throw up\
          a massive mountain range.\'94\
          \
          Cloud-gatherer Zeus\
          then answered him and said:\
          \
          \'93Brother, listen now\
          to what my heart thinks best\'97when all of them\
          are in the city looking out, as that boat\
          speeds on her way, then turn her into stone\
[190] close to the shore, a rock that looks just like                             \
          some fast ship, so all men will be amazed.\
          Then raise a massive mountain round their town.\'94\
          \
          When Earthshaker Poseidon heard these words, he left\
          and went to Scheria, home of the Phaeacians.                                                                        \
          There he waited. As their sea-faring ship approached,\
          moving quickly on her course, Earthshaker came up\
          and turned it into stone. With the palm of his hand\
          he hit it once and from below froze it in place.\
          Then Poseidon left. The long-oared Phaeacians,\
[200] men famous for their ships, spoke to one another\'97                        \
          their words had wings. Looking at the man beside him,\
          one of them would say:\
          \
          \'93Who has fixed our swift ship\
          out at sea as she was racing homeward,\
          and in plain sight of all?\'94    \
          \
          That\'92s what they said.                                                 \
          But they didn\'92t understand why this had happened.\
          Then Alcinous addressed them all and said:\
          \
          \'93Alas!\
          The prophecies my father used to make\
          so long ago have come to pass. He\'92d say\
          Poseidon would get angry with us,\
[210] because we conduct all men in safety.                                                                \
          He claimed that one day, as a splendid ship\
          of the Phaeacians was returning home,\
          after a convoy on the misty seas,\
          Poseidon would strike her and then throw up\
          a huge mountain range around our city.\
          That\'92s what the old man said. And now all this\
          is taking place. But come, let all of you\
          attend to what I say. You must now stop                                                         `               \
          escorting mortal men when any man\
[220] comes to our city. And let\'92s sacrifice                                         \
          twelve choice bulls as offerings to Poseidon,\
          so he\'92ll take pity and not ring our city\
          with a lofty mountain range.\'94\
          \
          Alcinous spoke.\
          They were all afraid, so they prepared the bulls.\
          Then the Phaeacian counsellors and leaders,\
          standing by the altar, prayed to lord Poseidon.\
          \
          Meanwhile, Odysseus, asleep in his own land,\
          woke up. He didn\'92t recognize just where he was.\
          He\'92d been away so long, and Pallas Athena,                                                                             \
[230] Zeus\'92 daughter, had shed a mist around him,                                                           \
          to make him hard for people to identify,\
          so she could tell him everything, while his wife,\
          his townsfolk, and his friends would not know who he was,\
          until the suitors\'92 crimes had all been paid in full. \
          And so all things seemed unfamiliar to their king,\
          the long straight paths, the harbour with safe anchorage,\
          the sheer-faced cliffs, the trees in rich full bloom.\
          So he jumped up and looked out at his native land.\
          He groaned aloud and struck his thighs with both his palms,\
          then expressed his grief, saying:\
          \
[240] \'93Where am I now?                                                         \
          Whose country have I come to this time?\
          Are they violent, unjust, and cruel,\
          or do they welcome strangers? Do their minds\
          respect the gods? And all this treasure here,\
          where do I take that? Where do I go next?\
          I wish I\'92d stayed with the Phaeacians there.\
          I\'92d have visited another mighty king\
          who would\'92ve welcomed me, then sent me off\
          on my way home. I\'92ve no idea now\
[250] where to put this wealth. I won\'92t leave it here,                                           \
          in case someone robs me and removes it\
          as his spoils. Alas! All those Phaeacians,\
          those counsellors and leaders, weren\'92t so wise                                                           \
          or just\'97they led me to a foreign land.\
          They said they\'92d bring me to bright Ithaca,\
          but that\'92s not what they\'92ve done. I pray that Zeus,\
          god of suppliants, who watches everyone\
          and punishes the man who goes astray,\
          will pay them back. But come, I\'92ll count these gifts\
[260] and check them out, just in case these men                              \
          in their hollow ship have carried away\
          some property of mine.\'94\
          \
          After saying this,\
          Odysseus began to count the lovely tripods,\
          cauldrons, gold, and splendid clothing. It was all there.\
          Then, overwhelmed with longing for his native land,\
          he wandered on the shore beside the crashing sea,                                                            \
          with many cries of sorrow. Then Athena came,\
          moving close to him in the form of a young man,\
          someone who herded sheep, but with a refined air\
[270] that marks the sons of kings. She wore a well-made cloak,                       \
          a double fold across her shoulders, and sandals\
          on her shining feet. In her hand she gripped a spear.\
          Odysseus, happy to catch sight of her, came up\
          and spoke to her\'97his words had wings:\
          \
          \'93My friend,\
          since you\'92re the first one I\'92ve encountered here,\
          my greetings to you, and may you meet me\
          with no evil in your mind. Save these goods,                                                               \
          and rescue me. For I\'92m entreating you,\
          the way I would a god, and I\'92ve come here\
[280] begging as a dear friend at your knee.                                                               \
          Tell me the truth, so I can understand\'97\
          What country is this? Who are these people?\
          Is it some sunny island or a headland\
          of the fertile mainland reaching out to sea?\'94\
          \
          Athena, goddess with the gleaming eyes, replied:\
          \
          \'93Stranger, you\'92re a fool, or else you\'92ve come\
          from somewhere far away, if you must ask\
          about this land. It\'92s name is not unknown\'97\
          not at all\'97many men have heard of it,\
[290] all those who live in regions of the dawn                                           \
          and rising sun, as well as all who dwell\
          towards the gloomy darkness in the west\'97\
          a rugged place, not fit for herding horses,\
          yet not too poor, although not very wide.\
          There are countless crops and wine-bearing grapes.\
          There\'92s no lack of rain or heavy dew,\
          a fine land for raising goats and cattle.\
          There are all sorts of trees and watering holes\
          that last throughout the year. And so, stranger,  \
[300] the name of Ithaca is even known in Troy,                                                   \
          a long way from Achaean land, they say.\'94\
          \
          Athena spoke, and much-enduring lord Odysseus                                                             \
          felt great joy, happy to learn of his ancestral lands\
          from what Pallas Athena said, daughter of Zeus,\
          who bears the aegis. So he spoke winged words to her.\
          He didn\'92t tell the truth, but left some things unsaid,\
          always thinking up sly thoughts inside his chest:\
          \
          \'93I\'92ve heard of Ithaca, even in wide Crete,\
          far across the sea. Now I\'92m here in person,\
[310] with these goods of mine. When I ran away,                                               \
          I left even more there with my children.\
          I killed a dear son of Idomeneus,\
          swift-footed Orsilochus\'97in spacious Crete                                               \
          he was the fastest runner of all those \
          who work to earn their bread.4 He wished\
          to steal away the spoils I\'92d won at Troy,\
          for which my heart had gone through so much pain,\
          suffering men\'92s wars and dangers on the sea,\
          because I wouldn\'92t gratify his father\
[320] and serve as his attendant there in Troy,                                                         \
          but led another group of my own men.\
          As he was coming home, back from the fields,\
          I lay in wait for him with my companions,\
          close to the road. There with my bronze-tipped spear\
          I struck him. Black night concealed the heavens,\
          and no one noticed us or was aware                                                                                    \
          I took his life. Once my sharp bronze killed him,\
          I ran off to a ship without delay,\
          offered prizes to some fine Phoenicians,\
[330] as much as they could wish, entreating them,                                             \
          begging them to take me off to Pylos,\
          land me there, or else to lovely Elis,\
          where Epeians rule. Much against their will,\
          the power of the winds drove them off course.\
          They didn\'92t wish to cheat me, but were blown\
          away from there and sailed in here at night.\
          We quickly rowed into this anchorage.\
          Although we needed food, we never thought                                                              \
          of dinner\'97we all lay down where we were.\
[340] I was so tired, sweet sleep fell over me.                                                             \
          They took my goods out of the hollow ship\
          and piled them where I lay down in the sand.\
          Then they went on board and sailed away\
          for bustling Sidon, leaving me behind\
          with all these troubles in my heart.\'94\
          \
          Odysseus finished.\
          Bright-eyed Athena smiled and stroked him with her hand.\
          Then she changed herself into a lovely woman,\
          tall and very skilled in making splendid things.\
          She spoke to him\'97her words had wings:                                                                                     \
          \
          \'93Any man \
[350] or even a god who ran into you                                                \
          would have to be a cunning charlatan\
          to surpass your various kinds of trickery.\
          You\'92re bold, with subtle plans, and love\
          deceit. Although you\'92re now in your own land,\
          it doesn\'92t look as if you\'92re going to stop\
          your lies or making up those artful stories,\
          which you love from the bottom of your heart.\
          But come, let\'92s no longer speak of this,\
          for we both understand what shrewdness means.\
[360] Of all men you\'92re the best in making plans                              \
          and giving speeches, and among all gods\
          I\'92m well known for subtlety and wisdom.\
          Still, you failed to recognize Pallas Athena,                                                                  \
          daughter of Zeus, who\'92s always at your side,\
          looking out for you in every crisis.\
          Yes, I made all those Phaeacians love you.\
          Now I\'92ve come to weave a scheme with you\
          and hide these goods Phaeacian noblemen\
          gave you as you were setting out for home,\
[370] thanks to my plans and what I had in mind.                                                \
          I\'92ll tell you what Fate has in store for you\'97\
          you\'92ll find harsh troubles in your well-built home.\
          Be patient, for you must endure them all.\
          Don\'92t tell anyone, no man or woman,\
          you\'92ve returned from wandering around.\
          Instead, keep silent. Bear the many pains,\
          and, when men act savagely, do nothing.\'94                                                                     \
          \
          Resourceful Odysseus then answered her and said:\
          \
          \'93Goddess, it\'92s difficult for any man\
[380] to recognize you when he meets you,                                                                 \
          even if he\'92s really wise, for you appear\
          in any shape you wish. But I know well\
          that in years past you\'92ve been kind to me,\
          when we sons of Achaea fought in Troy.\
          But when we\'92d ransacked Priam\'92s lofty city\
          and sailed off in our ships and then some god\
          scattered the Achaeans, I never saw you,\
          daughter of Zeus. I didn\'92t notice you\
          coming aboard our ship to keep me safe\
[390] from danger. So I kept on wandering,                                                                         \
          my heart always divided in my chest,\
          until the gods delivered me from trouble.\
          Then, in the rich land of the Phaeacians, \
          your words encouraged me, and you yourself\
          led me into their city. Now I beg you,\
          in your father\'92s name, for I don\'92t believe\
          I\'92ve come back to sunny Ithaca. No.\
          I\'92m footloose in some other country,\
          and you\'92re attempting to confuse my mind.\
[400] So tell me truly if I have arrived                                                \
          in my dear native land.\'94\
          \
          Then Athena,\
          the bright-eyed goddess, answered him:\
          \
          \'93That heart in your chest                                               \
          always thinks this way. And that\'92s the reason\
          I can\'92t leave you in distress. You\'92re so polite,\
          intelligent, and cautious. Another man\
          who\'92d just come back from wandering around\
          would\'92ve been eager to rush home to see\
          his wife and children. But you\'92re not keen\
          to learn about or hear of anything,\
[410] before you can observe your wife yourself.                                                   \
          She\'92s still living in her home, as before\'97\
          her nights and days always end in sorrow,\
          and she weeps. As for me, I had no doubts,\
          for my heart always knew you\'92d get back home,\
          although your comrades would all be destroyed.                                                     \
          But you should know I had no wish to fight\
          against Poseidon, my father\'92s brother,\
          who bears anger in his heart against you,\
          enraged that you destroyed his dear son\'92s eye.\
[420] But come, I\'92ll demonstrate to you this land                              \
          is Ithaca, so you\'92ll be reassured.\
          This anchorage here belongs to Phorcys,\
          the Old Man of the Sea. At the harbour head\
          stands the long-leafed olive tree. Beside it\
          is the pleasant, shadowy cave, sacred\
          to those nymphs they call the Naiads.\
          This, you must know, is the arching cavern\
          where you made many sacrificial gifts                                                                                \
          to those same nymphs to grant your wishes.\
[430] And there is forested Mount Neriton.\'94                                                               \
          \
          As the goddess said these words, she dispersed the mist.\
          Once the land was visible, lord Odysseus,\
          who had endured so much, overjoyed to see it,\
          kissed the fertile ground. Then, stretching out his arms\
          towards the nymphs, he made this prayer:\
          \
          \'93You Naiad nymphs,\
          Zeus\'92 daughters, I thought I\'92d never catch\
          a glimpse of you again. Now I greet you\
          with a loving prayer. I\'92ll give gifts, as well,\
          as I have done for you in earlier days,\
[440] if Zeus\'92 daughter who awards the spoils                                    \
          will in her goodness let me stay alive\
          and help my dear son grow into a man.\'94                                                                         \
          \
          Athena, the bright-eyed goddess, then said to him:\
          \
          \'93Be brave, and don\'92t weigh down your heart with this.\
          Now, let\'92s not delay, but put away these goods\
          in some hidden corner of this sacred cave,\
          where they\'92ll stay safely stored inside for you.\
          And then let\'92s think about how all these things\
          may turn out for the best.\'94\
          \
          After saying this,\
[450] the goddess went into the shadowy cave                                          \
          and looked around for hiding places. Odysseus\
          brought in all the treasures\'97enduring bronze and gold\
          and finely woven clothes, gifts from the Phaeacians.\
          He stored these carefully, and Pallas Athena,                                                                          \
          daughter of aegis-bearing Zeus, set a rock in place\
          to block the entranceway. \
          \
          Then the two of them \
          sat down by the trunk of the sacred olive tree \
          to think of ways to kill those arrogant suitors.\
          Bright-eyed goddess Athena was the first to speak:                             \
          \
[460] \'93Resourceful Odysseus, Laertes\'92 son                                          \
          and child of Zeus, think how your hands may catch\
          these shameless suitors, who for three years now\
          have been lording it inside your palace,\
          wooing your godlike wife and offering her\
          their marriage gifts. She longs for your return.\
          Although her heart is sad, she feeds their hopes,                                                      \
          by giving each man words of reassurance.\
          But her mind is full of other things.\'94\
          \
          Resourceful Odysseus then answered her and said:\
          \
[470] \'93Goddess, if you had not told me all this,                                                        \
          I would have shared the fate of Agamemnon, \
          son of Atreus, and died in my own home.\
          Come, weave a plan so I can pay them back.\
          Stand in person by my side, and fill me\
          with indomitable courage, as you did\
          when we loosed the bright diadem of Troy.\
          O goddess with the gleaming eyes,\
          if you are with me now as eagerly\
          as you were then, with your aid I\'92d fight                                                                           \
[480] three hundred men, if you, mighty goddess,                                                \
          are willing in your heart to help me.\'94\
          \
          Bright-eyed goddess Athena then answered him:\
          \
          \'93You can be sure I\'92ll stand beside you.\
          I won\'92t forget you when the trouble starts.\
          I think the brains and blood of many suitors\
          who consume your livelihood will spatter\
          the wide earth. But come, I\'92ll transform you,\
          so you\'92ll be unrecognizable to all.\
          I\'92ll wrinkle fine skin on your supple limbs,\
[490] remove the dark hair on your head, and then                          \
          dress you in rags which would make you shudder                                                  \
          to see clothing anyone. And your eyes,\
          so striking up to now, I\'92ll make them dim.\
          To all those suitors you\'92ll appear disgusting,\
          and to the wife and son you left at home.\
          You must go first of all to see the swineherd,\
          who tends your pigs. He\'92s well disposed to you\
          and loves your son and wise Penelope.\
          You\'92ll find him keeping his swine company\
[500] where they feed by Corax Rock, near the spring                       \
          of Arethusa, drinking its dark water\
          and eating lots of acorns, which make pigs                                                                   \
          grow rich in fat. Stay there and sit with him.\
          And ask him questions about everything.\
          I\'92ll go to Sparta, land of lovely women,\
          and there, Odysseus, I\'92ll summon back\
          your dear son, Telemachus, who has gone\
          to spacious Lacedaemon, to the home\
          of Menelaus, to find out news of you,\
[510] to learn if you are still alive somewhere.\'94                                                       \
          \
          Resourceful Odysseus then answered her and said:\
          \
          \'93Why did you not tell him, since in your mind\
          you know all things? What did you intend\'97\
          that he\'92d experience hardships on his trip\
          across the restless seas, while other men\
          were eating up his livelihood?\'94\
          \
          Athena,                                                       \
          goddess with the gleaming eyes, then said to him:\
          \
          \'93Don\'92t let your heart get too concerned with him.\
          I sent him off myself, so he might earn\
[520] a well-known reputation going there.                                                                 \
          He\'92s not in trouble, but sits there in peace,\
          in the home of the son of Atreus,\
          with countless fine things set before him.\
          It\'92s true some young men out in a black ship\
          are lying in ambush, keen to murder him\
          before he gets back to his native land,\
          but I don\'92t think that\'92s what will come about.\
          Before that happens, earth will cover up\
          the many suitors who consume your goods.\'94\
          \
[530] As she said this, Athena touched him with her staff.                                         \
          She wrinkled the fair skin on his supple limbs                                                                       \
          and took the dark hair from his head. His arms and legs\
          she covered with an old man\'92s ancient flesh and dimmed\
          his eyes, which had been so beautiful before.\
          She dressed him in different clothes\'97a ragged cloak,\
          a dirty tunic, ripped and disheveled, stained\
          with stinking smoke. Then she threw around him\
          a large hairless hide from a swift deer and gave him\
          a staff and a tattered leather pouch, full of holes\
          and with a twisted strap.\
          \
[540] When the two of them                       \
          had made their plans, they parted, and Athena went \
          to Lacedaemon to bring back Odysseus\'92 son.                                                                          \
}