{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf460
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural\qc

\f0\fs24 \cf0 BOOK FOURTEEN\
Odysseus Meets Eumaeus\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural
\cf0           \
[Odysseus leaves the harbour and moves inland to the farm of Eumaeus, the swineherd; Eumaeus welcomes Odysseus and prepares a meal for him; Eumaeus talks about his absent master; Odysseus assures Eumaeus that his master will return, but Eumaeus does not believe him; Odysseus tells Eumaeus a long made-up story about his identity and his adventures in Egypt and elsewhere, telling him he heard news of Odysseus\'92 return; Eumaeus still does not believe him; the other swineherds arrive; Eumaeus prepares a sacrifice and another meal; Odysseus tells another story about an incident in the Trojan War; Eumaeus prepares a bed for Odysseus, then goes outside to guard the boars.]\
          \
          Odysseus left the harbour, taking the rough path\
          into the woods and across the hills, to the place\
          where Athena told him he would meet the swineherd,\
          who was, of all the servants lord Odysseus had,\
          the one who took best care of his possessions.\
          He found him sitting in the front part of his house,\
          a built-up courtyard with a panoramic view,\
          a large, fine place, with cleared land all around.\
          The swineherd built it by himself to house the pigs,\
  [10] property belonging to his absent master.                                                                     \
          He hadn\'92t told his mistress or old man Laertes.   \
          He\'92d made it from huge stones, with a thorn hedge on top                                       \
          and surrounded on the outside with close-set stakes\
          facing both ways, made by splitting oaks apart\
          to leave the dark heart of the wood. Inside the yard,\
          to house the pigs, he\'92d packed twelve sties together.\
          In each one fifty wallowing swine were penned,\
          sows for breeding. The boars, far fewer of them,\
          stayed outside. The feasting of the noble suitors\
  [20] kept their numbers low, for the swineherd always sent                    \
          the finest of all fattened hogs for them to eat.\
          Three hundred and sixty boars were there\'97four dogs,                                                 \
          fierce as wild animals, always lay beside them.\
          These the swineherd, a splendid man, had raised himself.\
          He was trimming off a piece of coloured ox-hide,\
          shaping sandals for his feet. Three of his fellows\
          had gone off, herding pigs in different directions.\
          He\'92d had to send a fourth man to the city\
          with a boar to be butchered for the suitors,\
  [30] so they could eat meat to their heart\'92s content.                                                     \
          \
          All of a sudden the dogs observed Odysseus. \
          They howled and ran at him, barking furiously.                                                                   \
          Odysseus was alert enough to drop his staff\
          and sit. Still, he\'92d have been severely mauled\
          in his own farmyard, but the swineherd ran up fast\
          behind them, dropping the leather in his hands.\
          Charging through the gate and shouting at his dogs,\
          he scattered them in a hail of stones here and there.\
          Then he spoke out to his master:\
          \'93Old man,\
  [40] those dogs would\'92ve ripped at you in no time,                                           \
          and then you\'92d have heaped the blame on me.\
          Well, I\'92ve got other troubles from the gods,\
          things to grieve about. For as I stay here,\
          raising fat pigs for other men to eat,\
          I\'92m full of sorrow for my noble master,                                                                            \
          who\'92s probably going hungry somewhere,\
          as he wanders through the lands and cities\
          where men speak a foreign tongue, if, in fact,\
          he\'92s still alive and looking at the sunlight.\
  [50] But follow me, old man. Come in the hut.                                                     \
          When you\'92ve had enough to eat and drink\
          and your heart\'92s satisfied, you can tell me\
          where you come from, what troubles you\'92ve endured.\'94\
          \
          With these words, the loyal swineherd went inside the hut,\
          brought Odysseus in, and invited him to sit,\
          after piling up some leafy twigs and, over them,\
          spreading out the shaggy skin of a wild goat,                                                                           \
          the large and hairy hide which covered his own bed.\
          Odysseus was glad to get this hospitality,\
          so he addressed him, saying:\
  [60] \'93Stranger,                                             \
          may Zeus and other gods who live forever\
          give you what you truly want\'97you\'92ve welcomed me\
          with such an open heart.\'94\
          \
          Then, swineherd Eumaeus,\
          you answered him and said:1\
          \'93It would be wrong,\
          stranger, for me to disrespect a guest,\
          even if one worse off than you arrived,\
          for all guests and beggars come from Zeus,\
          and any gift from people like ourselves,\
          though small, is welcome. It\'92s the fate of slaves\
  [70] always to fear young masters who control them.                                               \
          The gods are holding up the journey home\
          of the man who would\'92ve loved me kindly\
          and given me possessions of my own,\
          a home, a plot of land, a wedded wife\
          worthy of being wooed by many suitors,\
          the sorts of things a generous master gives\
          a servant who has toiled so hard for him,\
          whose work the gods have helped to thrive and grow,\
          the way the tasks I put my mind to here\
  [80] have prospered. If my master was at home                               \
          and growing old, he would\'92ve given me\
          so many things. But he has perished.\
          How I wish all of Helen\'92s relatives \
          had died, brought to their knees, since she \
          loosed the knees of so many warriors.\
          He went to Troy, famous for its horses,                                                                            \
          to carry out revenge for Agamemnon\
          by fighting Trojans.\'94\
          \
          After saying this,\
          he quickly cinched a belt around his tunic,      \
  [90] went out to the pig pens where the swine were held,                                       \
          picked out two from there, brought them in, and killed them.\
          He singed and cut them up, then skewered them on spits.\
          Once he\'92d roasted them completely, he picked them up\
          and, without taking out the spits, carried them still hot\
          over to Odysseus. Then he sprinkled over them\
          white barley meal. In a bowl carved out of ivy wood \
          he mixed wine sweet as honey. Then he sat down\
          opposite Odysseus, inviting him to dine:\
          \'93Eat now, stranger, what a servant offers,                                                                       \
[100] meat from a young pig, for the suitors take                              \
          the fatted hogs. Their hearts have no pity\
          and don\'92t ever think about gods\'92 anger.\
          The truth is this\'97the blessed gods don\'92t love\
          men\'92s reckless acts. No. They honour justice\
          and men\'92s righteousness. Even enemies\
          with cruel intentions can invade the lands\
          of someone else, and Zeus awards them spoils.\
          They fill their ships and then sail off for home.\
          And even in the hearts of men like these\
[110] falls a great fear of vengeance from the gods.                                            \
          But these suitors here, I think, know something\'97\
          they\'92ve heard a voice from one of the gods\
          about my master\'92s painful death. That\'92s why                                                               \
          they don\'92t want to have a righteous courtship\
          or go back to their own homes. No. Instead,\
          without a care they waste our property\
          in all their insolence, sparing nothing.\
          Every day and night Zeus sends, they kill\
          our animals, and not just one or two,\
[120] and, with their arrogance, they draw our wine,                                         \
          taking what they want and even more.\
          My master used to be a man of substance,\
          beyond all measure. No warrior hero\
          on the dark mainland or Ithaca itself\
          possessed as much. Twenty men combined\
          did not have so much wealth. I\'92ll tell you this\'97\
          on the mainland he\'92s got twelve cattle herds,                                                             \
          as many flocks of sheep and droves of pigs\
          and wide-ranging herds of goats, all of these\
[130] tended by foreign herdsmen or his own.                                                         \
          And here, on the edges of this island,\
          graze wandering herds of goats, eleven in all,\
          with loyal servants keeping watch on them.\
          To serve the suitors, every one of them\
          keeps driving in a creature from his flock,\
          the fattest one which seems to him the best.\
          That always happens, each and every day.\
          As for me, I guard and raise these pigs.\
          I choose with care and then deliver them\
          the finest of the boars.\'94\
          \
[140] Eumaeus finished.                                              \
          Meanwhile Odysseus eagerly devoured the meat\
          and drank the wine in silence. He was ravenous.                                                                \
          He was also sowing troubles for the suitors.\
          Once he\'92d eaten his heart\'92s fill and had enough,\
          Eumaeus filled the bowl from which he drank himself\
          and gave it to him full of wine. Odysseus took it,\
          happy in his heart, and spoke winged words to him:\
          \'93My friend, who was the man who used his wealth\
          to purchase you? Was he powerful and rich,\
[150] as you\'92ve just said? You claim he was destroyed                       \
          helping Agamemnon get his revenge.\
          Tell me. I may know him, a man like that.\
          Zeus and the rest of the immortal gods\
          know if I\'92ve seen him or heard any news.\
          For I\'92ve been travelling a lot.\'94                                                                                                     \
          \
          Then Eumaeus,\
          a worthy man, answered him and said:\
          \'93Old man,\
          no wanderer who came with news of him\
          could convince his wife or his dear son.\
          Men who roam about, when they need a meal,\
[160] have no desire to speak the truth\'97they lie.                                                  \
          Whoever moves around and reaches here,\
          this land of Ithaca, goes to my mistress\
          with some made-up tale. She receives him well,\
          with hospitality, and questions him\
          about each detail. Then she starts to grieve,\
          and tears fall from her eyes, as is fitting\
          when a woman\'92s husband dies far away.                                                                          \
          You too, old man, would make up a story\
          quickly enough, if someone offered you\
[170] a cloak and tunic and some clothes to wear.                                                \
          But by this time swift birds and dogs have ripped\
          the flesh from off his bones, and his spirit\'92s\
          slipped away. Or else in the sea the fish\
          have eaten him, and his bones now lie\
          on shore somewhere, buried in deep sand.\
          Anyway, he died out there. From now on,\
          it\'92s the fate of all his friends to grieve,\
          especially me\'97however far I travel,\
          I\'92ll never come across another man\
[180] who\'92d match him as a gentle master,                                                                   \
          not even if I went back home again\
          to where my mother and my father live,                                                                          \
          where I was born, where they reared me themselves.\
          I don\'92t mourn for them so much, though I yearn\
          to see them again with my own eyes\
          and be in my own native land once more.\
          What grips me is a longing for Odysseus,\
          who is gone. Even though he is not here,\
          stranger, I speak his name with full respect.\
[190] His love for me was great, and in his heart                               \
          he cared. So although he may be absent,\
          I call him my dear master.\'94\
          \
          Resourceful lord Odysseus \
          then answered him and said:\
          \'93My friend,\
          since you\'92re so resolved in your denials,\
          when you declare he\'92ll not come home again,\
          and your heart always clings to this belief,                                                                     \
          I won\'92t just tell you Odysseus will be back\'97\
          no, I\'92ll take an oath on it. When he comes,\
          when he gets back home, give me my reward\
[200] for my good news\'97let me have fine clothing,                                           \
          a cloak and tunic. Until that moment,\
          there\'92s nothing I\'92ll accept, despite my need.\
          For just as I despise the gates of Hades,\
          I hate the man who, in his poverty,\
          tells stories which are lies. Now let Zeus,\
          the first of gods, this welcoming table,\
          and the hearth of excellent Odysseus,\
          which I have reached, let them bear witness\'97\
          all these things will happen the way I say\'97                                                                  \
[210] Odysseus will come here within a month,                                                      \
          between the waning and the rising moons.\
          He\'92ll get back home and take out his revenge\
          on anyone here who has not honoured\
          his wife and noble son.\'94\
          \
          Then, swineherd Eumaeus,\
          you answered him and said:\
          \'93Old man,\
          I won\'92t be rewarding you for that good news.\
          Odysseus won\'92t be coming back. Drink up.\
          Relax. Now, let\'92s talk of something else.\
          I don\'92t want to remember all those things.\
[220] The heart here in my chest gets full of grief,                                                \
          when someone mentions my good master.                                                                   \
          So let\'92s forget about your oath. I wish\
          Odysseus would come home\'97that\'92s what I want.\
          So does Penelope, Laertes, too,\
          the old man, and noble Telemachus.\
          Right now I\'92m always grieving for the boy,\
          the child Odysseus had, Telemachus.\
          The gods brought him up just like a sapling,\
          and, as a man, I thought he\'92d be a match\
[230] for his dear father, with a splendid shape                                  \
          and handsome. But one of the immortals\
          warped his better judgment\'97perhaps it was\
          some human being. For he\'92s gone on a trip\
          to sacred Pylos to find out some news\
          about his father. Now noble suitors                                                                                       \
          lie in wait for him as he comes home,\
          and so the race of noble Arceisius\
          will die without a name in Ithaca.2\
          But let\'92s just let him be\'97they may get him,\
[240] or he may escape, if the son of Cronos                                     \
          holds out his hand to guard him. But come now,\
          old man, tell me about your troubles.\
          Give me the truth, so I clearly understand\'97\
          Who are you among men? Where are you from?\
          Where are your city and your parents?\
          On what kind of ship did you get here?\
          How did sailors bring you to Ithaca?\
          Who did they claim they were? For I don\'92t think                                                    \
          you reached this place on foot.\'94\
          \
          Resourceful Odysseus \
          then answered him and said:\
[250] \'93All right, then,                                 \
          I\'92ll tell you the truth of what you\'92ve asked me.\
          I wish we two had food and honey wine\
          to last a while, so we could feast in peace\
          inside your hut, while others did the work.\
          I could easily go on for one whole year\
          and never finish talking of those things\
          my heart has suffered, all those torments\
          I\'92ve endured, thanks to what the gods have willed.\
          I claim my family comes from spacious Crete.\
[260] I\'92m a rich man\'92s child, and in his house                                    \
          many other sons were born and raised,                                                                            \
          his legal children from his lawful wife.\
          My mother was a purchased concubine.\
          Still, Castor, son of Hylax, the man\
          I claim as my own father, honoured me,\
          just as he did his true-born sons. Back then,\
          since he had wealth and land and worthy sons,\
          the Cretans in the country looked on him\
          as if he were a god. But lethal Fates\
[270] took him to Hades\'92 home, and his proud sons                          \
          divided up his goods by drawing lots.\
          They gave me a really tiny portion                                                                                        \
          and assigned a house. But I won a wife\
          from people who had many rich estates,\
          thanks to my courage\'97for I was no fool,\
          nor was I a coward. Now all that strength\
          has gone. A host of troubles wears me down.\
          But by examining the husk, I think,\
          you can assess the plant. Back then, Ares\
[280] and Athena  gave me strength and courage,                                                \
          the power to break ranks of men apart.\
          When I picked the finest troops for ambush\
          devising perils for my enemies,\
          my proud spirit never gave me any sense\
          that I might die. I always jumped out first,                                                                     \
          and my spear killed whatever enemy\
          ran off in front of me. That\'92s what I was like\
          when it came to war. But I got no joy\
          from working on the land or household chores,\
[290] like raising lovely children. No. Instead,                                                          \
          I was always fond of ships with oars\
          and wars with polished shields and arrows,\
          deadly things, so horrible to others.\
          I think I loved those things because a god\
          somehow set them in my heart. Different men\
          find their delight in different kinds of work.\
          Before Achaea\'92s sons set foot in Troy,\
          I\'92d led warriors and fast ships nine times                                                                         \
          against soldiers from foreign lands and won\
[300] enormous quantities of loot. I\'92d pick out                                  \
          what pleased me and then later get much more,\
          when we drew lots. Soon my house grew rich,\
          and Cretans honoured and respected me.\
          But when far-seeing Zeus planned that fatal trip\
          which loosed the knees of many warriors,\
          they asked me and famous Idomeneus\
          to lead their ships to Troy. There was no way\
          one could refuse\'97the people\'92s voice insisted.\
          So we Achaean sons fought there nine years,                                                              \
[310] and ransacked Priam\'92s city in the tenth.                                                          \
          We set out for home, but then some god\
          scattered the Achaeans. And Counselor Zeus\
          devised some difficulties just for me,\
          to make me miserable. I stayed at home,\
          enjoying my children, the wife I\'92d married,\
          and my wealth only for a single month.\
          Then my heart urged me to outfit some ships\
          and sail to Egypt with my noble comrades.\
          I manned nine ships. The fleet was soon prepared.\
[320] My loyal companions feasted for six days\'97                             \
          I gave them many beasts to sacrifice,                                                                                  \
          as offerings to the gods and to prepare \
          a banquet for themselves. On the seventh day,\
          we left wide Crete. North Wind provided us\
          a stiff and welcome breeze, so we sailed on\
          quite easily, like drifting down a stream.\
          None of my ships was harmed, no one got sick\
          or injured, and we stayed in our seats,\
          while wind and helmsman held us on our course. \
[330] The fifth day we reached Egypt\'92s mighty river,                                           \
          where I moored my curving ships. Then I told\
          my loyal comrades to stay there with the ships,                                                        \
          keeping watch on them, while I sent out scouts\
          to find some places we could use as lookouts. \
          But my crew, overcome with arrogance, \
          and trusting their own might, at once began\
          to plunder the Egyptians\'92 finest fields.\
          They took their women and small children, too,\
          and killed the men. Shouts soon reached the city,\
[340] and, once they heard the noise, Egyptians came,                                    \
          as daylight first appeared. The entire plain\
          filled up with chariots and infantry,\
          all flashing bronze. Zeus, who hurls the lightning,\
          threw a nasty panic in my comrades,\
          so no one dared to stay and face the fight.\
          We were badly threatened from all quarters.                                                              \
          They killed many of our men with their sharp bronze,\
          and took some alive, so they could force men\
          to do their work for them. Then Zeus himself\
[350] put an idea in my heart\'97but still,                                                                          \
          I wish I\'92d died and met my fate right there,\
          in Egypt, since all sorts of troubles still\
          lay waiting for me\'97I at once removed\
          the finely crafted helmet from my head\
          and the shield slung round my shoulders. My hand\
          let go my spear. I ran out straight ahead,\
          to the chariot of the king, clutched his knee, \
          and kissed it. Because he pitied me,\
          he saved my life. He set me in his chariot,\
[360] and, as I wept, he took me to his home.                                                                   \
          Many of his men, armed with their ash spears,\
          charged at me\'97their anger was so great,\
          they were keen to slaughter me. But the king\
          restrained them\'97he wanted to respect\
          the rage of Zeus, the god of strangers,  \
          who is especially irked at wicked deeds.\
          I stayed there seven years and gathered up\
          a great deal of wealth from those Egyptians,\
          for they all gave me gifts. When the eighth year\
[370] came wheeling in, a Phoenician man arrived,                                            \
          a greedy rogue who understood deceit.\
          He\'92d already brought men lots of trouble.\
          Well, he won me over with his cunning                                                                            \
          and took me with him, until we reached\
          his house and his possessions in Phoenicia.\
          I stayed there with him an entire year.\
          But as the days and months kept passing by\
          and yearly seasons rolled around once more,\
          he put me on a sea-going ship to Libya,\
[380] making up a story for me of some scheme                               \
          that I\'92d be carrying a cargo with him,\
          whereas, in fact, once we were there, he meant\
          to sell me off for an enormous profit.\
          Though I suspected something, I had to go\
          aboard the ship with him. North Wind blew\
          a fresh and welcome breeze, and we sailed off,\
          a mid-sea course on the windward side of Crete.3                                                 \
          Then Zeus planned the destruction of his men.\
          When we\'92d sailed past Crete, we saw land no more,\
[390] only sky and sea. Then the son of Cronos                                \
          sent a black cloud above our hollow ship.\
          Underneath the sea grew dark. All at once,\
          Zeus thundered and then hurled a lightning flash\
          down on our ship, which shook from stem to stern\
          and filled with sulphurous smoke, as Zeus\'92 bolt\
          came crashing down. All the crew fell overboard\
          and floated on the waves, like cormorants,\
          by our black ship\'97the god then took away\
          the day of their return. As for me,                                                                                          \
[400] though anguish filled my heart, Zeus himself                            \
          set my hands on the colossal main mast\
          from our black-prowed ship, so once again\
          I could escape destruction. I hung on,\
          and was carried off by dreadful winds\
          for nine full days. On the tenth dark night,\
          a huge rolling wave threw me up on shore\
          in Thesprotian land, and there the king,\
          Pheidon, ruler of the Thesprotians, \
          welcomed me, without demanding ransom.4\
[410] When I\'92d been overcome with weariness                                  \
          and freezing wind, his dear son had met me,\
          helped me stand again, and brought me home,\
          to his father\'92s palace. He gave me clothes\'97                                                                 \
          a tunic and a cloak. There I heard reports\
          about Odysseus. For king Pheidon said \
          he\'92d welcomed him with entertainments,\
          as he was returning to his native land.\
          He showed me what Odysseus had gathered,\
          all the bronze and gold and well-worked iron,\
[420] so many riches stored in Pheidon\'92s home,                                                     \
          they\'92d feed ten generations after him.\
          Odysseus, he said, had gone to Dodona,\
          to hear from the massive towering oak tree,\
          sacred to the god, what Zeus had willed\
          about his own return to that rich land\
          of Ithaca, after being away so long\'97                                                                                   \
          whether he should do so openly or not.5\
          As he poured libations in his house,\
          he swore to me a ship had been hauled down\
[430] and a crew prepared to take Odysseus                                      \
          to his native land. However, before that,\
          he sent me off, since, as it so happened,\
          a ship with a crew of Thesprotians,\
          full of corn, was sailing to Dulichium.\
          He told them to take me there, treating me\
          with all due kindness, and deliver me\
          to king Acastus. But those sailors\'92 hearts\
          were more attracted to a nasty scheme\
          concerning me\'97so I would be reduced\
[440] to utter wretchedness. Thus, when the ship                              \
          had sailed some distance from the land, they tried\
          from that day forward to make me their slave.                                                         \
          They ripped away my clothes, cloak and tunic,\
          and dressed me differently, a ragged cloak\
          and filthy tunic ripped to bits, these here\'97\
          the ones you see before your very eyes.\
          They reached the fields of sunny Ithaca\
          that evening. Inside that well-decked ship\
          they tied me up with tightly twisted rope\
[450] and went ashore, in a rush to eat a meal                                  \
          beside the sea. But the gods themselves \
          with ease untied my bonds, and so I wrapped\
          my rags around my head and slipped away\
          down a smooth plank, chest first into the sea.                                                           \
          Then with both arms I paddled and swam off.\
          I left the water far away from them\
          and moved inland, where leafy bushes grew,\
          and lay crouching down. They began to shout\
          and wandered here and there. But then they thought\
[460] there was no point in searching any more.                                                    \
          So they went back on board their hollow ship.\
          The gods themselves concealed me easily\
          and led me on my way. They brought me here,\
          to the farmyard of a man who understands.\
          My fate, I think, is to continue living.\'94\
          \
          Then, swineherd Eumaeus, you answered him and said:                                              \
          \'93Stranger, you\'92re unlucky. The tale you tell\
          has really touched my heart, all those things\
          you\'92ve suffered, all the places where you roamed.\
[470] But I don\'92t think it\'92s all just as you said,                                                            \
          and what you mentioned of Odysseus\
          does not convince me. Given who you are,\
          why must you tell such pointless falsehoods?\
          I know well that in my master\'92s journey home\
          he was totally despised by all the gods.\
          That\'92s why they didn\'92t kill him over there,\
          among the Trojans or in his comrades\'92 arms,\
          when he was done with war. All Achaeans then\
          would have made him a tomb\'97and for his son\
[48he would\'92ve won great fame in days to come.                                            o        \
          Now the spirits of the storm have snatched him,\
          and there\'92s no glory. And as for me, I live\
          here among the pigs, far away from men.\
          I don\'92t go to the city, unless I\'92m called\
          to travel there by wise Penelope,\
          when a message reaches her from somewhere.\
          Then people sit around the man who\'92s come\
          and ask him questions about everything,\
          both those who are grieving for their ruler,\
[490] who\'92s been away so long, and other men                                 \
          who\'92re happy to consume his livelihood \
          without paying anything. I don\'92t like\
          to investigate it or ask questions,\
          not since the day a man from Aetolia \
          tricked me with his story. He\'92d killed a man.                                                              \
          After moving around in many lands,\
          he reached my home. I gave him a fine welcome.\
          He said he\'92d seen Odysseus with Cretans\
          in Idomeneus\'92 home, mending his ships,\
[500] which had been damaged in some storms. He claimed             \
          he\'92d return by summer or harvest time,\
          with his fine comrades and many treasures.\
          And so you, you long-suffering old man, \
          since a spirit led you to me, shouldn\'92t try\
          to cheer me up or secure my favour\
          by telling falsehoods. That\'92s not the reason\
          I show you respect and give you welcome,\
          but because I pity you and fear Zeus,\
          god of strangers.\'94\
          \
          Then resourceful Odysseus                                            \
          answered Eumaeus with these words:                                         \
[510] \'93The heart in your chest                    \
          is really hard to sway. That oath I swore,\
          even that action didn\'92t influence you\
          or win you over. But come now, let\'92s make\
          this promise\'97the gods who hold Olympus\
          will stand as witnesses for both of us\
          in days to come\'97if your master does get back\
          to his own home, you\'92ll give me some clothing,\
          a cloak and tunic, and then send me off\
          to Dulichium, as my heart desires,\
[520] and if your master doesn\'92t come the way                                  \
          I say he will, then set your men on me\
          and have them throw me off a towering cliff,\
          so some other beggar will be careful                                                                                    \
          to avoid deception.\'94\
          \
          The splendid swineherd\
          then said in reply:\
          \'93Yes, stranger, what a way for me\
          to gather fame and fortune among men,\
          both now and in the future, to kill you,\
          steal your precious life, after bringing you\
          to my own hut and entertaining you!\
[530] I could later pray to Zeus, Cronos\'92 son,                                                             \
          with a sincere heart. Now it\'92s time to eat.\
          I hope my comrades get here quickly,\
          so we can make a tasty meal here in the hut.\'94\
          \
          As these two were talking like this to each other,\
          the other herdsmen came in with their swine.                                                                        \
          They shut the sows up in their customary pens,\
          so they could sleep. The pigs gave out amazing squeals,\
          as they were herded in. Then the trusty swineherd\
          called out to his companions:\
          \'93Bring a boar in here,\
[540] the best there is, so I can butcher it                                           \
          for this stranger from another country.\
          We too will get some benefit from it,\
          seeing that we\'92ve worked hard for such a long time\
          and gone through troubles for these white-tusked pigs,\
          while others gorge themselves on our hard work\
          without paying anything.\'94\
          \
          Once he\'92d said this, \
          with his sharp bronze axe he chopped up wood for kindling,\
          while others led in a big fat boar, five years old,\
          and stood him by the hearth. The swineherd\'92s heart was sound,                          \
[550] and he did not forget the gods. So he began                                     \
          by throwing in the fire some bristles from the head\
          of the white-tusked boar and praying to all the gods\
          that wise Odysseus would come back to his own home.\
          Then he raised his arm, and with a club made out of oak,\
          which he\'92d left lying beside him, he struck the boar.\
          Life left the beast. Then the others slit its throat, \
          singed its bristles, and quickly carved it up.\
          At first, the swineherd offered pieces of the meat\
          from all the limbs, set in layers of rich fat.\
[560] After sprinkling barley meal all over these,                                                               \
          he threw them in the fire. They sliced up the rest,                                     \
          put it on spits, cooked it with care, drew it all off,\
          and set heaps of meat on platters. The swineherd,\
          whose heart always concerned itself with what was fair,\
          stood up to carve, and as he served up all the meat,\
          he split it into seven portions. Saying a prayer,\
          he set one aside for Hermes, son of Maia,\
          and for the nymphs. The rest he gave to each of them,\
          honouring Odysseus with a long cut from the back\
[570] of the white-tusked boar. That pleased his master\'92s heart.                         \
          So resourceful Odysseus spoke to him and said: \
          \'93Eumaeus, may father Zeus treat you as well                                                               \
          as you are treating me with this boar\'92s chine,\
          the very finest cut of meat, even though\
          I\'92m just a beggar.\'94\
          \
          Then, swineherd Eumaeus,\
          you replied by saying:\
          \'93Eat up, god-guided stranger,\
          and enjoy the kind of food we offer.\
          A god gives some things and holds others back,\
          as his heart prompts, for he can do all things.\'94\
          \
[580] Eumaeus spoke and offered to eternal gods                                     \
          the first pieces he had cut. He poured gleaming wine\
          as a libation, passed it over to Odysseus,\
          sacker of cities, then sat to eat his portion.\
          Mesaulius served the bread, a servant\
          Eumaeus purchased on his own, when his master                                                               \
          was away. He\'92d not informed his mistress\
          or old man Laertes. He\'92d acquired the slave\
          from Taphians, using resources of his own.6  \
          So they stretched out their hands to the generous meal\
[590] set out in front of them. Once they\'92d had their fill                           \
          of food and drink, and their hearts were quite content,\
          Mesaulius took away their food. They\'92d eaten\
          so much bread and meat, they were keen to get some rest.\
          Night came on, bringing storms. There was no moon.\
          And Zeus sent blustery West Wind blowing in with rain,\
          a steady downpour all night long. Odysseus\
          spoke to them, trying to test Eumaeus, to see if,\
          given all the hospitality he\'92d shown,  \
          he\'92d take off his cloak and give it to Odysseus,                                                                      \
[600] or would urge one of his comrades to give up his.                                              \
          \'93Eumaeus and the rest of you, his work mates,\
          hear me now\'97I wish to tell a story, \
          prompted by this wine, which can confuse our wits.\
          Wine can make a man, even though he\'92s wise,\
          sing out loud, or giggle softly to himself,\
          or leap up and dance. It can bring out words\
          which were better left unsaid. But still, \
          since I\'92ve begun to speak, I\'92ll hide nothing.\
          I wish I were as young, my strength as firm,\
[610] as when we were setting up an ambush                                    \
          and guiding men to it below Troy\'92s walls.\
          Our leaders were Odysseus and Menelaus,                                                                   \
          son of Atreus\'97and along with them,\
          I was third in command, on their orders.\
          When we reached the steep walls of the city,\
          we lay down in thick bushes round the place,\
          swampy reeds, crouched down behind our weapons.\
          A nasty night came on. North Wind dropped off,\
          and it was freezing cold. Snow fell on us,\
[620] like frost from high above, bitterly cold.                                                          \
          Our shields were caked with ice. Now, the others\
          all wore cloaks and tunics, and could rest there\
          quite easily, their shields across their shoulders.\
          But when I\'92d set out, like a fool I\'92d left                                                                              \
          my cloak behind with my companions,\
          Not thinking I\'92d feel the cold without it,\
          I\'92d just brought my shield and shining doublet.\
          Well, when it was the third watch of the night  \
          and the stars had shifted their positions,\
[630] I spoke to Odysseus, who was close by.                                                             \
          When my elbow nudged him, he was all ears,\
          instantly prepared to listen:\
          \
          \'91Resourceful Odysseus, Laertes\'92 son,\
          and child of Zeus, I won\'92t be here for long,\
          not among the living. Instead, this cold\
          will kill me off. I don\'92t have a cloak.\
          Some spirit deluded me, made me come\
          with just a tunic. Now there\'92s no way out.\'92\
          \
          \'93That\'92s what I said. In his heart he had a plan\'97                                                       \
[640] that\'92s the kind of man he was for scheming                              \
          or for fighting war. With a quiet whisper,\
          he spoke to me:\
          \
          \'91Keep silent for the moment,\
          in case one of our Achaeans hears you.\'92\
          \
          \'93Then he propped his head up on his elbow,\
          and spoke out, saying:\
          \
          \'91Listen to me, friends.\
          As I slept, a dream sent from the gods\
          came to me. We\'92ve moved a long way forward,\
          too far from our ships. I wish some man\
          would tell Agamemnon, son of Atreus,\
[650] shepherd of his people, in the hope                                   \
          he\'92d tell more men to come out from the fleet.\'927\
          \
          \'93Once he\'92d said this, Thoas jumped up quickly,\
          Andraemon\'92s son. He threw off his purple cloak                                                     \
          and started running to the ships. Well then,\
          I was happy to lie down in his cloak.\
          Then Dawn appeared on her golden throne.\
          I wish I were as young as I was then,\
          and my strength as firm. Then in this farmyard,\
          some swineherd would give me a cloak to wear,\
[660] from kindness and respect for a brave man.                                                \
          But now, with filthy clothing on my skin,\
          I receive no honours.\'948\
          \
          Then, swineherd Eumaeus,\
          you answered him and said:\
          \'93Old man, that story\
          you just told us is all right\'97you\'92ve spoken\
          to the point and made your wishes clear.\
          You won\'92t lack clothes or any other thing                                                                       \
          which a long-suffering suppliant should get\
          from those he meets, for tonight at least.\
          When morning comes you\'92ll have to dance around\
[670] in those rags of yours. We don\'92t have many cloaks                  \
          or other tunics here. We\'92ve each got only one.\
          But when Odysseus\'92 dear son arrives,\
          he\'92ll give you clothes himself, a cloak and tunic,\
          and send you where your heart desires to go.\'94\
          \
          After saying this, he jumped up and placed a bed\
          for Odysseus near the fire. On the bed he threw\
          some skins from sheep and goats. Odysseus lay down there.                                  \
          Eumaeus covered him with a huge thick cloak, \
          which he kept there as a change of clothing,\
[680] something to wear whenever a great storm blew.                                               \
          So Odysseus went to sleep there, and the young men\
          slept around him. But Eumaeus had no wish\
          to have his bed inside and sleep so far away\
          from all his boars. So he prepared to go outside.\
          Odysseus was pleased he took so many troubles\
          with his master\'92s goods while he was far away.\
          First, Eumaeus slung his sharp sword from his shoulder\
          and wrapped a really thick cloak all around him,\
          to keep out the wind. Then he took a massive fleece                                                      \
[690] from a well-fed goat and grabbed a pointed spear                           \
          to fight off dogs and men. Then he left the hut,\
          going to lie down and rest where the white-tusked boars\
          slept beneath a hollow rock, sheltered from North Wind.}