{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf460
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural\qc

\f0\fs24 \cf0 BOOK FITEEN\
Telemachus Returns to Ithaca\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural
\cf0 \
[Pallas Athena visits Sparta to urge Telemachus to return home, tells him to visit Eumaeus, the swineherd, when he gets back; Telemachus tells Menelaus he\'92d like to leave; Menelaus and Helen give gifts and a farewell banquet; they receive a favourable omen before leaving; Helen interprets the omen; Telemachus and Peisistratus leave Sparta and reach Pylos; Telemachus asks Peisistratus to leave him at his ship, so that Nestor won\'92t delay his return; Peisistratus agrees; a stranger arrives, Theoclymenus, a descendant of the prophet Melampus, and asks for passage on Telemachus\'92 ship; Telemachus agrees, and they sail for Ithaca; Odysseus and Eumaeus feast in the hut; Odysseus asks Eumaeus about his parents, and Eumaeus tells him; Eumaeus tells the story of how he got to Ithaca and was sold to Laertes; Telemachus lands in Ithaca and tells the crew to take the ship on without him; Theoclymenus interprets a bird omen; Telemachus walks to Eumaeus\'92 farmyard.]\
    \
      Then Pallas Athena went to spacious Lacedaemon,\
          to remind the noble son of glorious Odysseus\
          about going home and to urge him to return.\
          She found Telemachus and Nestor\'92s noble son\
          lying on the portico, resting in their beds,\
          inside the palace of splendid Menelaus.\
          Gentle sleep had overpowered Nestor\'92s son,\
          but for Telemachus no sweet sleep had come\'97\
          because in his heart all through that immortal night\
  [10] anxious thoughts about his father kept him awake.                                           \
          Bright-eyed Athena stood beside him and spoke out:\
          \'93Telemachus, it\'92s not good to wander                                                                                 \
          any longer from your home, abandoning \
          your property and leaving in your house\
          such overbearing men, who may divide\
          and use up all your goods. Then this journey\
          you have undertaken will be pointless.\
          As quickly as you can urge Menelaus,\
          expert at war shouts, to let you go back,\
  [20] so you can find your noble mother there,                                                       \
          still at home. Her father and her brothers\
          are already telling her to marry\
          Eurymachus\'97he gives more courting gifts\
          than any other suitor, and now he\'92s going\
          to offer even more as wedding gifts.\
          Take care she doesn\'92t carry from the house\
          some property, without your knowing it.\
          You understand what sort of spirit lies                                                                               \
          inside a woman\'92s chest. She wants to enrich\
  [30] the household of the man who marries her                               \
          and no longer thinks about her children\
          or her previous husband whom she loved.\
          Now he\'92s dead, she doesn\'92t ask about him.\
          You should go yourself and entrust your goods\
          to the female slave you esteem the most,\
          until the gods show you a splendid bride.\
          I\'92ll tell you something else\'97take it to heart.\
          The bravest of the suitors lie in wait,\
          enough to set an ambush, in the straits\
  [40] between Ithaca and rugged Samos.                                                                        \
          Before you get back to your native land,                                                                         \
          they want to murder you. But in my view,\
          that won\'92t be happening. Before it does,\
          the earth will cover many of those suitors,\
          who are consuming all your livelihood.  \
          You must steer your well-built ship on a course\
          far from the islands, and keep on sailing\
          day and night. One of the immortal gods\
          who\'92s watching over and protecting you\
  [50] will send you following winds. And then,                                                        \
          at the first place you reach in Ithaca,\
          send your companions and the ship ahead,\
          on to the city\'97you yourself should go\
          to see the swineherd, the man who tends your pigs.\
          He\'92s very well disposed towards you.\
          Spend the night with him. And then tell him                                                               \
          to go into the city and bring news\
          to wise Penelope that you are safe\
          and have returned from Pylos.\'94\
          \
          Athena spoke.\
  [60] Then she left, going back to high Olympus.                                                              \
          With his foot Telemachus nudged Nestor\'92s son\
          and roused him from sweet sleep. Then he spoke to him:\
          \'93Wake up, Peisistratus, son of Nestor.\
          Bring up your well-shod horses, then yoke them\
          to the chariot, and we\'92ll be on our way.\'94\
          \
          Peisistratus, Nestor\'92s son, then answered him:\
          \'93No matter how keen you may be to leave,\
          Telemachus, there\'92s no way we can ride\
          in this dark night. Dawn will soon be here.                                                                   \
  [70] So wait until warrior Menelaus,                                                                                 \
          son of Atreus, that famous spearman, \
          brings gifts and puts them in the chariot,\
          then sends us off with a kind farewell speech.\
          A guest remembers all his life the man\
          who gave him hospitality and kindness.\'94\
          \
          He spoke. Soon Dawn arrived on her golden throne.\
          Then Menelaus, expert in battle shouts,\
          rose up from bed beside his fair-haired Helen\
          and came to see the two. When he noticed him,\
  [80] Odysseus\'92 dear son rushed to put on a bright tunic,                                                    \
          slung a thick cloak across his hefty shoulders,\
          and went out. He came up to Menelaus\
          and spoke to him, saying:\
          \'93Menelaus,\
          son of Atreus and cherished of Zeus,\
          leader of your people, send me back now\
          to my native land, for my heart is keen\
          to get back home.\'94\
          \
          Then Menelaus,\
          expert at war cries, answered him:\
          \'93Telemachus,\
          I\'92ll not hold you back a long time here,\
  [90] not if you\'92re eager to return. I\'92d blame                                     \
          another man who, as a host, provides                                                                                 \
          too much hospitality or not enough.\
          It\'92s far better to show moderation.\
          It\'92s bad when someone doesn\'92t want to leave\
          to be too quick to send him on his way,\
          but just as bad is holding someone back\
          when he\'92s ready to depart. For a host\
          should welcome any guest in front of him\
          and send away the one who wants to go.\
[100] But stay until I bring some fine gifts here                                 \
          and set them in your chariot, where your eyes\
          can see them, and I can tell the women\
          to prepare a meal inside the palace\
          from the plentiful supply of food there.\
          For a traveler to feast before he leaves\
          to journey on the wide unbounded earth\
          brings double benefits\'97it gives him help\
          and gives me fame and honour. If you wish\
          to go through Hellas and middle Argos,                                                                            \
[110] then I\'92ll accompany you in person.1                                          \
          I\'92ll have some horses harnessed for you,\
          and I\'92ll guide you to men\'92s cities there.\
          Not one of them will send us from their town\
          without offering some gift for us to take,\
          a beautiful bronze tripod or a cauldron,\
          a pair of mules or goblet made of gold.\'94\
          \
          Prudent Telemachus then answered him and said:\
          \'93Menelaus, son of Atreus,\
          child of Zeus, and leader of your people, \
[120] I wish to get back home without delay\'97                                  \
          when I went away I didn\'92t leave behind\
          anyone to protect my property.\
          As I keep searching for my noble father,                                                                         \
          I hope I don\'92t get killed or in my palace\
          have any fine possessions stolen.\'94\
          \
          When Menelaus, skilled in war cries, heard these words,\
          he quickly told his wife and her attendants \
          to use some of the abundant food they stored\
          to prepare a banquet. Then Etoneus,\
[130] son of Boethous, came up to Menelaus\'97                                         \
          he lived close by and had just got out of bed.\
          Menelaus, skilled at war shouts, ordered him\
          to get a fire started and to roast some meat. \
          Once Etoneus heard, he did what he\'92d been asked.\
          Menelaus went down to his fragrant storage room\'97\
          not by himself, for Helen and Megapenthes                                                                             \
          went along as well. Once they reached the places\
          where his treasures lay, the son of Atreus\
          picked up a two-handled cup and told his son,\
[140] Megapenthes, to take a silver mixing bowl.                                                               \
          Helen went up to the storage chests which held\
          the richly woven garments she herself had made.\
          Then Helen, goddess among women, picked out one,\
          the largest and most beautifully embroidered\'97\
          it lay below the others, shining like a star.\
          Helen carried off this robe, and they returned, \
          back through the house, until they reached Telemachus.                                             \
          Fair-haired Menelaus then spoke to him:\
          \'93Telemachus,\
          may Zeus, Hera\'92s loud-thundering husband,\
[150] accomplish your return, as your heart desires.                                           \
          Of all the treasured gifts stored in my home,\
          I\'92ll give you the one with highest value\
          and the loveliest\'97I\'92ll present to you\
          this finely crafted mixing bowl. It\'92s made\
          entirely of silver and its rims\
          are plated gold. Hephaestus crafted it.\
          Warrior Phaedimus, the Sidonian king,\
          presented it to me on my way home,\
          when his house gave me shelter. Now I\'92d like\
          to send it back with you.\'94\
          \
[160] Menelaus spoke.                                        \
          Then Atreus\'92 warrior son handed Telemachus                                                                        \
          the two-handled cup, and mighty Megapenthes\
          brought in the mixing bowl of shining silver\
          and set it down before him. Fair-cheeked Helen,\
          standing beside him with the garment in her hands,\
          spoke to Telemachus and said:\
          \'93My dear child,\
          I\'92m giving you this gift as a reminder\
          of Helen, something made by her own hands.\
          Your bride can wear it on her wedding day,\
[170] a moment to look forward to. Until then,                                 \
          let it remain in your dear mother\'92s room.\
          As for you, I wish you a joyful journey\
          back to your well-built home and native land.\'94\
          \
          With these words, Helen placed the garment in his hands.                                       \
          Telemachus accepted it with pleasure.\
          Noble Peisistratus took the gifts and packed them\
          in a box inside the chariot, gazing at them\
          with wonder in his heart. Fair-haired Menelaus\
          then led them to the house, where they sat down\
[180] on stools and chairs. A female servant carried in                             \
          a beautiful gold jug and poured some water out\
          into a silver basin, so they could rinse their hands,\
          then placed a polished table right beside them.\
          The worthy housekeeper carried in some bread\
          and set it down before them, then lots of meat,\
          giving freely from the food she had in store.\
          Standing near them, Etoneus carved the meat                                                                       \
          and handed out the portions, while Megapenthes,\
          son of splendid Menelaus, poured the wine.\
[190] Then their hands reached for the food spread out before them.           \
          Once they\'92d had food and drink to their heart\'92s content,\
          Telemachus and the noble son of Nestor\
          yoked the horses, climbed in the ornate chariot,\
          and drove from the portico through the echoing gate.\
          Fair-haired Menelaus went out after them.\
          His right hand held a gold cup full of honey wine,\
          so they might pour libations before setting out.\
          Standing there beside the horses,  Menelaus\
          made a pledge to both of them and said:                                                                                     \
          \'93Farewell,\
[200] young men. Make sure you greet Nestor for me,                                    \
          shepherd of his people. Over in Troy,\
          when we sons of Achaea went to war,\
          he truly was a gentle father to me.\'94\
          \
          Prudent Telemachus then replied and said:\
          \'93Zeus-fostered king, we will indeed tell him\
          all the things you ask, once we get there.\
          How I wish when I returned to Ithaca\
          I\'92d come across Odysseus in his home,\
          so I could tell him how, when I left here,\
[210] I\'92d met with every hospitality                                                    \
          and taken many splendid gifts away.\'94\
          \
          As he said these words, a bird flew over them,                                                                       \
          to the right\'97an eagle clutching in its talons\
          a huge white goose, a tame one from some farm.\
          A crowd of men and women chased behind it,\
          shouting as they ran. The bird came close to them,\
          then veered off to the right before the horses.\
          When they saw that, they were happy\'97in all their chests\
          the spirits filled with joy. Then the son of Nestor,\
[220] Peisistratus, was the first of them to speak:                                                                \
          \'93Menelaus, leader of your people,\
          cherished by Zeus, tell us about this sign\'97\
          whether god sent it to the two of us\
          or just to you alone.\'94\
          \
          Peisistratus spoke.\
          War-loving Menelaus thought it over\'97\
          How should he understand the omen properly                                                                      \
          and then provide the correct interpretation?\
          But before he said a word, long-robed Helen spoke\
          and said these words:\
          \'93Listen to me.\
[230] I will prophesy what the immortals                                           \
          have set into my heart, what I believe\
          will happen. Just as this eagle came here\
          from mountains where it and its young were born\
          and snatched up this goose bred in the household,\
          that\'92s how Odysseus, after all his suffering\
          and his many wanderings, will come home\
          and take revenge. Or he\'92s already home,\
          sowing destruction for all the suitors.\'94\
          \
          Wise Telemachus then answered her and said:\
[240] \'93Now may Zeus, loud-thundering mate of Hera,                                             \
          bring that about. If so, I\'92ll pray to you\
          as to a god.\'94\
          \
          Telemachus said this,\
          then flicked the horses with his whip. They sped off quickly,\
          keen to move on through the city toward the plain.\
          All day long the yoke around their shoulders rattled.\
          Then the sun went down, and all the roads grew dark.\
          They came to Pherae, to Diocles\'92 house,\
          the son of Ortilochus, Alpheus\'92 child.\
          Diocles welcomed them with hospitality\
[250] the way one should with strangers. There they spent the night.            \
          As soon as rose-fingered early Dawn appeared, \
          they yoked the horses, climbed in the ornate chariot,                                                     \
          then drove out from the echoing portico and gate.\
          Peisistratus touched the horses with his whip,\
          and they sped on willingly. They quickly reached\
          the steep citadel of Pylos. Telemachus\
          then addressed the son of Nestor:\
          \'93Peisistratus,\
          will you promise to do something for me,\
          and see it through just as I tell you?\
[260] We can claim that we\'92ve always been friends,                                            \
          because our fathers were good friends, as well, \
          and we are the same age. This trip of ours\
          will make our hearts united even more.\
          So, child of Zeus, don\'92t take me past my ship\
          but leave me there, in case old man Nestor                                                                  \
          keeps me in his house against my will,\
          wishing to show me hospitality,\
          when I must now get home with all due speed.\'94\
          \
          Telemachus spoke. In his heart Nestor\'92s son\
[270] considered how he might make such a promise                               \
          and see it through to its conclusion. As he thought,\
          he did what seemed to him the better option\'97\
          he turned the horses to the swift ship by the shore,\
          took out the lovely gifts, the clothing and the gold,\
          which Menelaus had given Telemachus,\
          stowed them in the stern, then urged him onward\'97\
          his words had wings:\
          \'93Move quickly now.\
          Climb in your ship, and tell all your comrades\
          to do so, too, before I get back home                                                                                  \
[280] and let old Nestor know what\'92s happening.                                                  \
          For in my heart and mind I know too well\
          he likes things done his way\'97he won\'92t let you go\
          but come in person here to call you back.\
          I tell you, he won\'92t go back without you.\
          In any case, he\'92s sure to be upset.\'94\
          \
          Once he\'92d said this, Peisistratus drove his horses,\
          creatures with lovely manes, quickly back to Pylos.\
          He soon reached the palace. Meanwhile, Telemachus\
          urged his companions on, saying to them:\
[290] \'93Comrades, put all the stuff in our black ship.                                            \
          Let\'92s get ourselves on board, so we can sail.\'94                                                               \
          \
          Once he spoke, they all heard him and obeyed at once.\
          Soon they were aboard, sitting at their oarlocks.\
          At the ship\'92s stern, Telemachus was busy\
          praying to Athena and offering sacrifice.\
          Then a man approached, someone from far away, \
          fleeing from Argos because he\'92d killed a man.\
          He was prophet, descended from Melampus,\
          who many years ago had lived in Pylos,\
[300] a sheep-breeding land. He\'92d been a wealthy man,                                             \
          living in a rich house among the Pylians.\
          But then Melampus went into a foreign land,\
          fleeing his country and great-hearted Neleus, \
          the most illustrious of all living men, \
          who for one whole year had taken his wealth by force,                                                 \
          while Melampus lay tied up in savage bondage\
          in Phylacus\'92 palace, suffering harsh cruelty,2\
          all for the sake of Neleus\'92 daughter\
          and thanks to the terrible blindness in his heart\
[310] which the goddess Erinys, who strikes down families,                                     \
          had fixed on him. But then he got away from Fate\
          and drove the bellowing herd from Phylace\
          to Pylos. Thus, he managed to obtain revenge \
          for the disgraceful acts of noble Neleus\
          and led the daughter home to be his brother\'92s wife.\
          But he went off to Argos, where horses graze,\
          a land of strangers. He was destined to live there,\
          ruling many Argives. Then he took a wife,                                                                                 \
          built a high-roofed house, and fathered two strong sons,\
[320] Antiphates and Mantius. Antiphates                                                 \
          fathered brave Oicles, who then produced\
          Amphiaraus, a man who could rouse people up,\
          and whom Apollo and aegis-bearing Zeus\
          loved in all sorts of ways. But he failed to reach old age\'97\
          he died in Thebes, thanks to a woman\'92s need for gifts.3    \
          He had two sons\'97Alcmaeon and Amphilocus.\
          And Mantius fathered Cleitus and Polypheides.\
          Cleitus was so beautiful he was snatched away                                                                       \
          by Dawn on her golden throne, so he might live\
[330] with the immortal gods, and then Apollo                                         \
          made high-minded Polypheides his prophet,\
          the best of men, after Amphiaraus was dead.\
          He was angry with his father and moved away\
          to Hyperesia, where he lived and prophesied \
          to all. His son\'92s name was Theoclymenus\'97\
          he was the one who now approached Telemachus,\
          as he poured out libations by his swift black ship\
          and prayed. Standing by him, Theoclymenus spoke\'97\
          his words had wings:\
          \'93Friend, since I\'92ve met you here                                                                      \
[340] while making sacrifice, I\'92m asking you,                                                             \
          for the sake of your offerings and the god\
          and by your comrades\'92 lives and by your own,\
          answer what I ask, and tell me the truth,\
          concealing nothing. Among men who are you?\
          Where is your city and your parents?\'94\
          \
          Shrewd Telemachus then answered him and said: \
          \'93All right, stranger, I will speak candidly.\
          I am from Ithaca by birth. My father\
          is Odysseus, as surely as he was alive,\
[350] but now he\'92s died by some pitiful fate.                                                               \
          That\'92s why I got this crew and this black ship\
          and came to find news about my father                                                                           \
          who\'92s been absent for so long.\'94\
          \
          Noble Theoclymenus\
          then said in reply:\
          \'93I, too, have run away,\
          leaving my own country. I killed a man,\
          one of my family. Many relatives of his\
          live in horse-nurturing Argos\'97they rule\
          Achaeans there and have enormous power.\
          I\'92m fleeing to prevent them killing me,\
[360] a dark fate. So now it\'92s my destiny,                                                                       \
          I think, to roam around among mankind.\
          Let me board your ship\'97I\'92m a fugitive,\
          and I\'92m begging you, so they won\'92t kill me.\
          I think they\'92re on my track.\'94\
          \
          Prudent Telemachus\
          then answered him and said:\
          \'93If you\'92re keen to come,                                                   \
          there\'92s no way I\'92d stop you boarding my trim ship.\
          So come with us. You\'92ll find a welcome here,\
          as much as we possess.\'94\
          \
          As he said these words,\
          he took the bronze spear Theoclymenus held,\
[370] set it down lengthwise on the deck of the curved ship,                                  \
          and then himself climbed in the ocean-going boat.\
          He had Theoclymenus sit by him in the stern.\
          The crewmen loosed the cables. Then Telemachus\
          called his comrades, urging them to hoist the tackle.\
          They hurried to obey, lifting up the mast of fir\
          and setting it in place in its hollow socket.\
          They tightened forestays, and then hoisted a white sail                                                 \
          on twisted ox-hide ropes. Bright-eyed Athena\
          send favouring winds blowing stiffly through the air,\
[380] so the ship could complete its voyage quickly                                   \
          over salt waters of the sea. So they sailed on\
          past Crouni and Calchis, with its lovely streams.\
          Then the sun went down, and all the routes grew dark.\
          They made for Pheae, driven on by winds from Zeus,\
          and for fair Elis, where Epeians rule. From there,\
          Telemachus steered them past the jagged islands,\
          wondering if he\'92d get caught or escape being killed.                                                        \
          Meanwhile, Odysseus and the faithful swineherd\
          were eating in the hut, with the other men as well.\
[390] When they\'92d had food and drink to their heart\'92s content,                          \
          Odysseus spoke to them, testing the swineherd,\
          to see if he would keep up his kindly welcome\
          and ask him to go on staying there at the farm\
          or if he would send him off towards the city:\
          \'93Eumaeus and all the rest of you,\
          listen to me now. Tomorrow morning\
          I\'92d like to wander off and beg in town,\
          so I won\'92t exhaust you and your comrades.\
          So give me good advice, then send me off                                                                     \
[400] with a fine guide who can conduct me there.                                              \
          I\'92ll have to wander round the city by myself,\
          hoping to get a cup and piece of bread.\
          Then I could go to lord Odysseus\'92 home\
          and give some news to wise Penelope\
          and mingle with those arrogant suitors.\
          They might give me a meal\'97they\'92ve lots of food.\
          If so, I could serve them well in what they want.\
          Let me tell you. Pay attention now and listen.\
          Thanks to Hermes the Messenger, the one\
[410] who places grace and fame on all men\'92s work,                                                   \
          no other man can match the way I serve\
          in splitting dry wood and building a good fire,\
          roasting and carving meat, and serving wine,\
          all those actions performed by lesser men\
          when they are servants to nobility.\'94\
          \
          Then, swineherd Eumaeus, you were most upset\
          and spoke out to Odysseus:\
          \'93Why, stranger,\
          is your heart so full of this idea?\
          You must have a strong desire to die,\
[420] if you intend to go among the suitors,                                                                \
          that crowd whose pride and violence extend\
          right up to iron heaven. Their servants                                                                              \
          are not like you. No. The ones who serve them\
          are young men, well dressed in cloaks and tunics, \
          their heads and faces always sleek with oil.\
          They keep well-polished tables loaded down\
          with bread and meat and wine. So stay here.\
          No one in this place finds you a bother\'97\
          I don\'92t, nor do the others here with me.\
[430] When the dear son of Odysseus comes,                                                            \
          he\'92ll give you clothing, a cloak and tunic,\
          and send you where your heart and spirit urge.\'94\
          \
          Then much-enduring lord Odysseus answered him:                                        \
          \'93Eumaeus, I hope father Zeus likes you\
          as much as I do\'97you\'92ve brought to an end\
          my wanderings and painful hardships.\
          Nothing\'92s more miserable for human beings\
          than wandering round, but men put up with\
          wretched troubles for their stomach\'92s sake,\
[440] when they have to face the pain and sorrow                             \
          their roaming brings. Now, since you keep me here,\
          telling me to wait for your young master,\
          tell me of noble Odysseus\'92 mother\
          and his father, too. When he went away,\
          he left him just as he was growing old.\
          Are they still living in the sunshine here\
          or have they died and gone to Hades\'92 home?\'94                                                           \
          \
          Then the swineherd, a splendid fellow, answered him:\
          \'93Well, stranger, I\'92ll tell you the honest truth.\
[450] Laertes is still living, but all the time                                         \
          inside his home he keeps praying to Zeus\
          the spirit in his limbs will fade away.\
          He grieves excessively for his own son,\
          who\'92s gone, and for the wife he married,\
          a wise lady, whose death, above all else,\
          really troubled him and made him old\
          before his time. She died a wretched death\
          grieving for her splendid son. May no man\
          who lives here as my friend and treats me well                                                         \
[460] die the way she did!  While she was alive,                                                       \
          though she was sad, it was a pleasure for me\
          to ask about her, to find out how she was,\
          because she personally brought me up,\
          together with long-robed Ctimene,\
          her fine daughter, the youngest child she bore.\
          I was raised with her, though with less honour.\
          When we both reached our young maturity,\
          that time we long for, they sent her to Same\
          to be married and got countless wedding gifts.\
[470] She dressed me in fine clothes, cloak and tunic,                                      \
          and gave me sandals to tie on my feet,\
          then sent me out into the fields. In her heart                                                              \
          she was especially fond of me. But now,\
          I lack all this, though personally for me\
          the sacred gods prosper the work I do.\
          From that I\'92ve had food and drink and helped out\
          those who have a claim on my attention.\
          But now bad times have fallen on the house\
          with those overbearing men, I don\'92t hear\
[480] anything good, whether in word or deed,                                                       \
          about my lady, although servants have\
          a powerful longing to talk face to face\
          with their mistress and find out everything,\
          to eat and drink and then take something back\
          into the fields\'97such things warm servants\'92 hearts.\'94\
          \
          Resourceful Odysseus then answered him and said:                                                         \
          \'93Well, swineherd Eumaeus, you were just a child\
          when you wandered far off from your parents\
          and your native land. Come now, tell me this\'97\
[490] and speak candidly\'97was the place ransacked,                                          \
          that populated city with broad streets\
          where your lady mother and your father lived,\
          or were you alone with sheep or cattle?\
          Did hostile people take you in their ships\
          and bring you here to sell you to the master\
          of this palace, who paid a decent price?\'94\
          \
          The swineherd, an outstanding fellow, then replied:\
          \'93Stranger, since you ask me questions about this,                                                  \
          stay quiet, enjoy yourself, drink your wine,\
[500] as you sit there, and listen to my tale.                                                                \
          These nights go on forever. There\'92s a time\
          to sleep, and there\'92s a time to take delight\
          in hearing stories. You don\'92t need to rest\
          before you\'92re ready, and too much sleep\
          can leave one weary. As for the others, \
          if any man\'92s heart and spirit tell him,\
          let him go outside and sleep. Then at dawn\
          he can eat and walk behind our master\'92s swine.\
          We two will drink and feast here in the hut\
[510] and enjoy each other\'92s wretched troubles,                                                      \
          as we recall them. For once they\'92re over,                                                                        \
          a man who\'92s done a lot of wandering\
          and suffered much gets pleasure from his woes.\
          So now I\'92ll give you answers to those questions.\
          There\'92s an island you may have heard about\
          beyond Ogygia\'97it\'92s called Syrie,\
          where Sun changes his course. The land is good.\
          Though not too many people live on it,\
          there\'92re many herds and flocks, plenty of wine,\
[520] and lots of wheat. Famine never comes there,                                           \
          no dreadful sickness falls on poor mortal men.\
          Inside the city, when tribes of men get old,\
          Apollo comes there with his silver bow                                                                              \
          and Artemis as well. He attacks them\
          with his gentle arrows and kills them off.\
          There are two cities there, with all the land\
          divided up between them. My father\
          ruled both of them as king. He was Ctesius, \
          Ormenus\'92 son, like an immortal god.\
[530] Phoenicians came there, famous sailing men,                                            \
          greedy rogues, who carried countless trinkets\
          in their black ship. Now, in my father\'92s house\
          lived a tall, beautiful Phoenician woman,\
          skilled in making lovely things. Those Phoenicians,\
          truly crafty men, seduced her. First of all,\
          while she was doing laundry, one of them\
          had sex with her beside the hollow ship\'97                                                                      \
          love like that distracts the minds of women,\
          even the virtuous ones. When he asked her\
[540] who she was and where she came from, she said,                                   \
          pointing to my father\'92s high-roofed house:\
          \
          \'91I claim to come from Sidon, rich in bronze.\
          I\'92m a daughter of Arybas, whose wealth\
          was like a flood. But then I was taken\
          by Taphian pirates, as I was coming\
          from the fields. They brought me to this place \
          and sold me to the household of that man,\
          who paid an excellent price.\'92\
          \
          \'93Then the man                                  \
          who\'92d slept with her in secret said to her: \
          \
[550] \'91Would you come back home again with us,                                   \
          to see your father\'92s and mother\'92s lofty home\
          and them, as well? Yes, they\'92re still alive\
          and people say they\'92re wealthy.\'92\
          \
           \'94Then the woman answered him and said:\
          \
          \'91I might come, if you sailors were willing\
          to promise me on oath to take me home\
          safe and sound.\'92\
          \
          \'93When she\'92d said that,\
          they all took the oath, as she\'92d requested.\
          When they\'92d sworn and finished promising, \
[560] the woman spoke to them again and said:                                                     \
          \
          \'91Now, keep silent. None of your company                                                        \
          must talk to me, if you meet me in the street\
          or maybe at the springs, in case someone\
          runs to tell the old king in the palace.\
          If he gets suspicious, he\'92ll tie me up\
          in cruel bondage and then plan your death.\
          Keep what I\'92m saying in mind, and finish off\
          your trading quickly. When your ship is full,\
          your goods on board, send me a message\
[570] at the palace right away. I\'92ll bring gold,                                                \
          whatever I can lay my hands on there.\
          And there\'92s something else I\'92d like to offer\
          to pay my passage. Inside the palace                                                                       \
          my master has a child. I am his nurse.\
          Quite an impish boy\'97when we\'92re outside\
          he runs beside me. I\'92ll bring him on board.\
          He\'92ll earn you an enormous sum of money,\
          wherever you run into foreigners.\'92\
          \
          \'93She said this, then left for the fine palace.\
[580] The men stayed there with us for one whole year,                                 \
          and by trading filled their hollow ship with goods.\
          When the deep boat was loaded to return,\
          they sent a messenger to tell the woman.\
          The man, a shrewd one, reached my father\'92s house\
          with a gold necklace strung with amber beads.                                                         \
          In the hall servants and my noble mother\
          were handling and inspecting it, haggling\
          about the price. He nodded at the woman,\
          without saying a word. After that signal,\
[590] he went back to his hollow ship. So then,                                                        \
          she took my hand and led me from the house.\
          In the front hall she found cups and tables\
          left by those who had been feasting there,\
          men who were attendants on my father.\
          They\'92d just gone out to a council meeting\
          where they held public debates. On the spot\
          she stuffed three goblets in her bosom \
          and walked out with them. I followed her,                                                                     \
          without thinking a thing. The sun went down,\
[600] and all the roads grew dark. But we rushed on                         \
          and came to the fine harbour where we found\
          the swift ship which belonged to those Phoenicians.\
          They put us both on board, climbed in themselves,\
          and sailed away across the watery road.\
          Zeus sent a favouring wind. We sailed six days,\
          moving day and night. When Zeus, Cronos\'92 son,\
          brought us the seventh day, archer Artemis\
          struck the woman, and she fell with a thud\
          down in the hold, just like a sea bird\'92s fall.\
[610] They threw her overboard to make a meal                                       \
          for seals and fish. But I was left heart-sick.\
          The winds and waters carried them along\
          and brought them to Ithaca, where Laertes\
          purchased me with his own money. That how\
          I came to see this land with my own eyes.\'94\
          \
          Odysseus, born from Zeus, then answered him and said:\
          \'93Eumaeus, by telling me these things,\
          you\'92ve really stirred the heart here in my chest,\
          all those ordeals your spirit has endured..\
[620] But with the bad things Zeus has given you                               \
          he\'92s put some good\'97you\'92ve undergone much pain,\
          but you did come to a kind man\'92s house.\
          With a good heart, he gives you food and drink,                                                     \
          and the life you lead is good. As for me, \
          I\'92ve reached here only after wandering \
          through many cities of men.\'94\
          \
          So the two men\
          kept talking to each other. Then they fell asleep.\
          But they didn\'92t sleep for long, only for a while, \
          since Dawn soon reached there on her golden throne.\
[630] As Telemachus\'92 comrades were approaching land,                                             \
          they furled the sail and quickly lowered the mast.\
          Then, with their oars they rowed into an anchorage,\
          tossed out mooring stones, and lashed the cables at the stern.\
          They themselves then disembarked in the crashing surf,\
          to prepare a meal and mix the gleaming wine.                                                                      \
          When they\'92d had food and drink to their heart\'92s content,\
          prudent Telemachus was the first to speak:\
          \'93You men row the black ship to the city,\
          while I check on the fields and herdsmen.\
[640] I\'92ll come to the city in the evening,                                                                       \
          after I\'92ve looked over my estates.\
          In the morning I\'92ll lay out a banquet\
          as payment to you for the journey,\
          a splendid meal of meat and sweetened wine.\'94\
          \
          Then godlike Theoclymenus spoke up and said:\
          \'93Where do I go, dear lad? Of those who rule\
          in rocky Ithaca, whose house do I go to\'97                                                                      \
          directly to your and your mother\'92s home?\'94\
          \
          Prudent Telemachus then answered him and said:\
[650] \'93In different circumstances, I\'92d tell you                                    \
          to visit our house\'97there is no lack\
          of welcome there for strangers. But for you\
          it would be worse, because I\'92ll not be there,\
          and my mother will not see you. It\'92s rare\
          for her to show up among the suitors\
          in the house\'97she stays away from them\
          and does her weaving in an upper room.\
          But I\'92ll mention another man to you\
          and you can visit him\'97Eurymachus,\
[660] illustrious son of wise Polybius,                                                                                 \
          whom men of Ithaca see as a god.                                                                                          \
          He\'92s the best man by far and really keen\
          to marry my mother and then possess\
          the royal prerogatives of Odysseus.\
          But Olympian Zeus, who lives in heaven,\
          knows if, before that wedding day arrives,\
          he\'92ll bring about a day of reckoning.\'94\
          \
          As he said this, a bird flew past on the right,\
          a hawk, Apollo\'92s swift messenger. In its talons\
[670] it held a dove, which it was plucking, and feathers                           \
          fell on the ground halfway between Telemachus\
          and his ship. Theoclymenus called him aside,\
          away from his companions, grasped his hand, and spoke:                                         \
          \'93Telemachus, this bird flying to our right\
          has not come without being prompted by some god.\
          I knew when I saw it darting forward\
          it was an omen. In the land of Ithaca\
          no family is more royal than yours is.\
          No. You\'92ll be powerful for ever.\'94\
          \
[680] Prudent Telemachus then answered him and said:                                            \
          \'93Stranger, I hope that prophecy of yours\
          may be fulfilled. If so, you\'92ll quickly hear\
          of many gifts and kindnesses from me,\
          so any man you meet will call you happy.\'94\
          \
          Then he spoke to Peiraeus, a faithful comrade:\
          \'93Peiraeus, son of Clytius, of all those                                                                                   \
          who came with me on the trip to Pylos\
          you\'92re the one who is especially loyal.\
          So now conduct this stranger to your home,\
[690] take care to welcome him with honour,                                                            \
          until I get there.\'94\
          \
          Peiraeus, a famous spearman,\
          then answered him and said:\
          \'93Telemachus,\
          if you stay for a long time in these parts,\
          I will entertain him. He will not lack\
          anything that\'92s appropriate for guests.\'94\
          \
          After saying this, he went on board the ship,\
          and told the crew to get in and loose the cables.\
          They boarded quickly and sat down at their benches.\
          Telemachus tied sturdy sandals on his feet,                                                                              \
[700] then from the deck picked up his powerful spear                             \
          with a sharp bronze tip. The crew untied stern cables\
          and then pushed out to sea, sailing to the city,\
          as Telemachus, godlike Odysseus\'92 dear son,\
          had ordered them to do, while he strode quickly off, \
          his feet carrying him onward, until he reached\
          the farmyard and the pigs in countless numbers, \
          among whom the worthy swineherd lay asleep,\
          always thinking gentle thoughts about his master. }