{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf460
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural\qc

\f0\fs24 \cf0 BOOK SIXTEEN\
Odysseus Reveals Himself to Telemachus\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural
\cf0 \
[Telemachus arrives at Eumaeus\'92 farm; Eumaeus is overjoyed to see Telemachus back from his voyage; Telemachus, Eumaeus, and Odysseus (in disguise) talk together; Telemachus sends Eumaeus off to tell Penelope of his safe return; Athena tells Odysseus to reveal himself to his son and transforms his appearance; Telemachus and Odysseus are reunited; Telemachus and Odysseus discuss strategies for dealing with the suitors; Odysseus gives Telemachus instructions about hiding weapons and behaving in front of the suitors; a herald from Telemachus\'92 crew announces to Penelope and others the news of his return from Pylos; the suitors are upset and discuss what to do; Penelope appears before the suitors and upbraids Antinous for his behaviour; Antinous replies; Eumaeus returns to Odysseus and Telemachus in the hut; Athena transforms Odysseus into an old beggar once again; Odysseus, Eumaeus, and Telemachus eat a meal and go to sleep]\
\
          Meanwhile at dawn Odysseus and the loyal swineherd,\
          once they\'92d sent the herdsmen out with droves of pigs,\
          made a fire in the hut and prepared their breakfast.\
          As Telemachus came closer, the yelping dogs\
          stopped barking and fawned around him. Lord Odysseus\
          noticed what the dogs were doing and heard his footsteps.\
          At once he spoke out to Eumaeus\'97his words had wings:\
          \'93Eumaeus, some comrade of yours is coming,\
          or someone else you know. The dogs aren\'92t barking\
  [10] and are acting friendly. I hear footsteps.\'94                                                       \
          \
          He\'92d hardly finished speaking when his own dear son\
          stood in the doorway. The swineherd, amazed, jumped up\'97\
          the bowls he was using to mix the gleaming wine\
          fell from his hands. He went up to greet his master,\
          kissed his head, both his handsome eyes, his two hands,\
          then burst into tears. Just as a loving father\
          welcomes his dear son after a nine-year absence,\
          when he comes from a foreign land, an only son, \
          his favourite, for whom he\'92s undergone much sorrow,\
  [20] that\'92s how the loyal swineherd hugged Telemachus                                    \
          and kissed him often, as if he\'92d escaped his death.\
          And through his tears he spoke winged words to him:\
          \'94You\'92ve come, Telemachus, you sweet light.\
          I thought I\'92d never see you any more,\
          once you went off in that ship to Pylos.\
          Come in now, dear boy, so that my heart\
          can rejoice to see you here in my home,\
          now you\'92ve just returned from distant places.\
          You don\'92t often visit farm and herdsmen\'97\
  [30] your life is in the city. Your heart, I think,                                                      \
          must like to watch that hateful bunch of suitors.\'94\
          \
          Shrewd Telemachus then answered him and said:                                                              \
          \'93If you say so, old friend. I\'92ve come here now\
          on your account, to see you face to face\
          and to hear you talk about my mother.\
          Is she still living in the palace halls,\
          or has some other man now married her?\
          Is no one sleeping in Odysseus\'92 bed?\
          Is it all covered in disgusting cobwebs?\'94\
          \
  [40] The swineherd, that outstanding man, then answered him:                     \
          \'93Yes indeed, she still lives in your palace,\
          with a faithful heart, but always grieving,\
          wasting days and nights away with weeping.\'94\
          \
          Once he\'92d said this, he took Telemachus\'92 bronze spear,                                               \
          and let him enter. He crossed the stone threshold.\
          As he approached, Odysseus, his father, got up\
          to offer him his seat, but from across the room\
          Telemachus stopped him and said: \
          \'93Stay put, stranger.\
          We\'92ll find a chair in the hut somewhere else.\
  [50] Here\'92s a man who\'92ll get one for us.\'94                                                                     \
          \
          He spoke. Odysseus went back and sat down again.\
          Eumaeus piled up green brushwood on the floor\
          and spread a fleece on top. Odysseus\'92 dear son\
          sat down there. The swineherd then set out before them\
          platters of roast meat, left over from the meal                                                                       \
          they\'92d had the day before, and quickly heaped up\
          baskets full of bread. In a wooden bowl he mixed\
          wine sweet as honey, and then sat down himself,\
          opposite godlike Odysseus. Their hands reached out\
  [60] to the fine meal prepared and spread before them.                         \
          When they\'92d had food and drink to their heart\'92s content, \
          Telemachus then said to the splendid swineherd:\
          \'93Old friend, where does this stranger come from?\
          How did sailors bring him to Ithaca?\
          Who do they claim to be? For I don\'92t think\
          there\'92s any way he could get here on foot.\'94\
          \
          Then, swineherd Eumaeus, you answered him and said:                                              \
          \'93My child, I\'92ll tell you nothing but the truth.\
          He claims that he was born in spacious Crete\
  [70] and says he has been roaming all around,                                                      \
          wandering through many human cities.\
          That how some god has spun a fate for him.\
          He\'92s just fled from a ship of Thesprotians\
          and come here to my farm. I give him to you.\
          Do as you wish. He\'92s a suppliant, he says.\'94\
          \
          Shrewd Telemachus then answered him and said:\
          \'93Eumaeus, I\'92m really distressed at heart\
          by what you\'92ve said. How can I welcome                                                                         \
          this guest into my home? I myself am young\'97\
  [80] I don\'92t believe my hands are strong enough                             \
          to fight a man who acts with violence\
          against me first. As for my mother,\
          in her chest the heart is quite divided,\
          whether to stay with me and tend the house,\
          out of respect for what the people say\
          and for her husband\'92s bed, or to go now\
          with the finest man of those Achaeans\
          who\'92ve been courting her within the halls,\
          the one who offers the most marriage gifts.\
  [90] But anyway, now this stranger\'92s come here,                                                 \
          to your home, I\'92ll dress him in fine clothing,\
          cloak and tunic, and give a two-edged sword                                                              \
          and sandals for his feet. I\'92ll send him off\
          wherever his heart and spirit prompt him.\
          If you wish, you can keep him at this farm\
          and care for him. I\'92ll send some clothing here\
          and all the food he\'92ll eat, so he won\'92t ruin\
          you and your comrades. But I won\'92t permit him\
          to go there and mingle with the suitors\'97\
[100] they are far too full of arrogant pride                                       \
          and might make fun of him, which would bring me\
          deadly sorrow. It\'92s difficult for one man,\
          even if he\'92s powerful, to do much\
          with so many more. They are far stronger.\'94\
          \
          Then lord Odysseus, who had endured so much,                                                                 \
          said to Telemachus:\
          \'93Friend, surely it\'92s all right\
          for me to answer, and my heart is torn \
          as I hear you talk\'97these suitors think up\
          such presumptuous actions in your palace\
[110] and flout your will, though you\'92re a decent man.                                    \
          Tell me, do you agree with this oppression?\
          Do the people of the country hate you\
          and follow what some god is telling them?\
          Do you think the blame rests with your kinsmen,\
          whom a man relies on when there\'92s fighting,\
          even if a major quarrel should arise?\
          With my heart the way it is, how I wish\
          I were either as young as you, the son                                                                                \
          of brave Odysseus, or the man himself\
[120] returning from his travels\'97there\'92s still room                           \
          for us to hope for that\'97then, if I came\
          to the halls of Laertes\'92 son, Odysseus,\
          and didn\'92t bring destruction on them all, \
          let a stranger slice this head off my neck.\
          If I, acting all alone, was overwhelmed\
          by their greater numbers, I\'92d rather die,\
          killed in my own home, than continue watching\
          such disgraceful acts\'97guests treated badly,\
          women servants shamelessly being dragged\
[130] through the fine palace, wine drawn and wasted,                                           \
          and all the time food eaten needlessly,\
          acts which go on and on, without an end.\'94\
          \
           Shrewd Telemachus then answered him and said:\
          \'93Well, stranger, I\'92ll speak candidly to you.\
          The people are not all angry with me,\
          nor do they bear a grudge. And I don\'92t blame\
          my kinsmen, the ones a man relies on\
          in a fight, even if a great quarrel comes.\
          The son of Cronos has made our family\
[140] follow a single line. It goes like this\'97                                       \
          Arcisius fathered a single son,\
          Laertes, and he, too, was the father\
          of only a single son, Odysseus,\
          and Odysseus fathered me, his only son,\
          then left me by myself in his own hall.                                                                              \
          He got no joy of me. And that\'92s why now\
          countless hostile men are in our home.\
          All those lords with power in the islands\'97\
          Dulicium, Same, wooded Zycanthus\'97\
[150] and those who rule in rocky Ithaca,                                                                      \
          all of them are trying to court my mother\
          and destroy my home.1 She does not turn down\
          the hateful marriage, but cannot decide\
          to bring these matters to an end. And so,\
          with their feasting they consume my household,\
          and they\'92ll soon be the ruin of me, too.\
          But all this lies in the lap of the gods.\
          Old friend, you must go quickly and report                                                                  \
          to wise Penelope that I\'92ve returned, \
[160] I\'92m safely home from Pylos. I\'92ll stay here,                                                      \
          until you\'92ve given the news to her alone\
          and come back here. No other Achaean\
          must learn about it, for many of them\
          are planning nasty things against me.\'94\
          \
          Then, swineherd Eumaeus, you answered him and said:\
          \'93I know what you\'92re saying\'97I understand.\
          You\'92re speaking to a man who thinks things through.\
          But come, tell me this, and be frank with me.\
          On this trip should I go to Laertes\
[170] with the news? The poor man\'92s in misery.                                                     \
          For a while, though suffering great distress\
          about Odysseus, he\'92d supervise the fields                                                                        \
          and in his home eat and drink with servants,\
          as the heart inside his chest would urge him.\
          But now, since the time you left for Pylos,\
          people say he no longer eats and drinks\
          the way he used to or inspects the fields,\
          but sits there groaning and wailing, in tears,\
          with his flesh shriveling around his bones.\'94\
          \
[180] Shrewd Telemachus then answered him and said:                                              \
          \'93That\'92s more distressing, but nevertheless,\
          though it makes us sad, we\'92ll leave him alone.\
          If mortal men could somehow get all things\
          simply by wishing, we would first of all\
          select the day my father gets back home.\
          But after you\'92ve delivered your message,                                                                         \
          then come back here. Don\'92t go wandering\
          around the fields looking for Laertes.\
          Instead, tell my mother to send her maid,\
[190] the housekeeper, quickly and in secret.                                                            \
          She can report the news to the old man.\'94\
          \
          His words spurred on the swineherd. He took his sandals,\
          tied them on his feet, and set off for the city.\
          Now, it did not escape the notice of Athena\
          that swineherd Eumaeus was going from the farm.\
          She approached the hut, appearing like a woman,\
          beautiful, tall, and skilled in making lovely things.\
          She stood just outside the entrance to the farm\
          and was visible to no one but Odysseus.\
[200] Telemachus did not see her face to face                                                   \
          or notice she was there. For when gods appear,\
          there\'92s no way their form is perceptible to all.\
          But Odysseus saw her. So did the dogs, as well.\
          But they didn\'92t bark. Instead, they crept away,\
          whimpering in fear, to the far side of the hut.\
          She signaled with her eyebrows. Lord Odysseus\
          noticed and went out of the hut, past the large wall\
          around the yard, and stood in front of her.\
          Then Athena spoke to him:\
          \'93Son of Laertes, \
[210] resourceful Odysseus, sprung from Zeus,                                                        \
          Now is the time to speak to your own son\'97\
          make yourself known and don\'92t conceal the facts,\
          so you two can plan the suitors\'92 lethal fate,\
          then go together to the famous city.                                                                                     \
          I won\'92t be absent from you very long\'97\
          I\'92m eager for the battle.\'94\
          \
          As she said this, Athena\
          touched Odysseus with her golden wand. To start with,\
          she placed a well-washed cloak around his body,\
          then made him taller and restored his youthful looks.\
[220] His skin grew dark once more, his countenance filled out,                       \
          and the beard around his chin turned black again.\
          Once she\'92d done this, Athena left. But Odysseus\
          returned into the hut. His dear son was amazed.\
          He turned his eyes away, afraid it was a god,\
          and spoke to him\'97his words had wings:                                                                                      \
          \'93Stranger,\
          you look different to me than you did before\'97\
          you\'92re wearing different clothes, your skin has changed.\
          You\'92re one of the gods who hold wide heaven.\
          If so, be gracious, so we can give you\
[230] pleasing offerings, well-crafted gifts of gold.                                                \
          But spare us.\'94\
          \
          Long-suffering lord Odysseus \
          then answered him and said:\
          \'93I\'92m not one of the gods. \
          Why do you compare me to immortals? \
          But I am your father, on whose account\
          you grieve and suffer so much trouble,\
          having to endure men\'92s acts of violence.\'94\
          \
          He spoke, then kissed his son. A tear ran down his cheek                                          \
          onto the ground\'97till then he\'92d held himself in check.\
          But Telemachus, who could not yet believe \
[240] it was his father, spoke to him again, saying:                                                           \
          \'93You cannot be Odysseus, my father.\
          No. Some spirit has cast a spell on me,\
          to make me lament and grieve even more.\
          There\'92s no way a mortal man could plan this\
          with his own wits, unless some god himself\
          came by, who could, if he so desired,\
          make him young or old quite easily.\
          Not long ago you wore filthy clothing\
          and were an old man. But now you\'92re like\
[250] the gods who hold wide heaven.\'94                                                                                     \
          \
          Then resourceful Odysseus answered him and said:\
          \'93Telemachus, it\'92s not appropriate for you\
          to be overly surprised your father\
          is back home or to be too astonished.\
          You can rest assured\'97no other Odysseus \
          will ever be arriving. I am here.\
          I\'92ve endured a lot in many wanderings,\
          and now, in the twentieth year, I\'92ve come back\
          to my native land. This present business,\
[260] you should know, is forager Athena\'92s work.                                                 \
          She\'92s made me look like this\'97it\'92s what she wants,\
          and she has power\'97in one moment,\
          like a beggar, and in another one,\
          a young man with fine clothes around his body.                                                      \
          It\'92s easy for the gods who hold wide heaven\
          to glorify or else debase a man.\'94\
          \
          Once he\'92d said this, he sat down, and Telemachus\
          embraced his noble father, cried out, and shed tears.\
          A desire to lament arose in both of them\'97\
[270] they wailed aloud, as insistently as birds,                                                                     \
          like sea eagles or hawks with curving talons\
          whose young have been carried off by country folk\
          before they\'92re fully fledged. That\'92s how both men then\
          let tears of pity fall from underneath their eyelids.\
          And now light from the sun would\'92ve gone down on them,                                     \
          as they wept, if Telemachus had not spoken.\
          He suddenly addressed his father:\
          \'93In what kind of ship,\
          dear father, did sailors bring you here,\
          to Ithaca? Who did they say they were?\
[280] For I don\'92t think you made it here on foot.\'94                                                \
          \
          Noble long-suffering Odysseus answered him:\
          \'93All right, my child, I\'92ll tell you the truth.\
          Phaeacians, those famous sailors, brought me.\
          They escort other men, as well, all those\
          who visit them. And I remained asleep\
          as they transported me across the sea\
          in their swift ship and set me on Ithaca.\
          They gave me splendid gifts of bronze and gold                                                      \
          and woven clothing. Now, thanks to the gods,\
[290] these things are stored away in caves. I\'92ve come here               \
          at Athena\'92s bidding, so we may plan\
          destruction for our enemies. But come now,\
          tell me about the number of the suitors,\
          so I know how many men there are\
          and what they\'92re like. Then, once my noble heart\
          has thought it over, I\'92ll make up my mind,\
          whether we two are powerful enough\
          to take them on alone, without assistance,\
          or whether we should seek out other men.\'94\
          \
[300] Shrewd Telemachus answered him and said:                                                       \
          \
          \'93Father, \
          I\'92ve always heard about your great renown,\
          a mighty warrior\'97your hands are very strong,\
          your plans intelligent. But what you say\
          is far too big a task. I\'92m astonished.\
          Two men cannot fight against so many\'97\
          and they are powerful. In an exact count,\
          there are not just ten suitors or twice ten,\
          but many more. Here, you can soon add up\
          their numbers\'97from Dulichium there are\
[310] fifty-two hand-picked young men, six servants                        \
          in their retinue, from Same twenty-four,\
          from Zacynthus twenty young Achaeans,                                                                        \
          and from Ithaca itself twelve young men,\
          all nobility. Medon, the herald,\
          is with them, as is the godlike minstrel,\
          and two attendants skilled in carving meat.\
          If we move against all these men inside,\
          I fear revenge may bring a bitter fate,\
          now you\'92ve come home. So you should consider\
[320] whether you can think of anyone who\'92ll help,                                            \
          someone prepared to stand by both of us\
          and fight with all his heart.\'94\
          \
          Then lord Odysseus,\
          who had endured so much, answered him and said:\
          \'93All right, I\'92ll tell you. Pay attention now,\
          and listen. Do you believe Athena,                                                                                        \
          along with Father Zeus, will be enough\
          for the two of us, or should I think about\
          someone else to help us?\'94\
          \
          Shrewd Telemachus\
          then said in reply:\
          \'93Those two allies you mention\
[330] are excellent. They sit high in the clouds,                                                        \
          ruling others, men and immortal gods.\'94\
          \
          Long-suffering lord Odysseus answered him and said:\
          \'93The two of them won\'92t stand apart for long\
          from the great fight\'97we can be sure of that\'97\
          when Ares\'92 warlike spirit in my halls\
          is put to the test between these suitors\
          and ourselves. But for now, when Dawn arrives,                                                     \
          go to the house, join those arrogant suitors.\
          The swineherd will bring me to the city \
[340] later on. I\'92ll be looking like a beggar,                                                                  \
          old and wretched. If they\'92re abusive to me,\
          let that dear heart in your chest endure it,\
          while I\'92m being badly treated, even if\
          they drag me by my feet throughout the house\
          and out the door or throw things and hit me.\
          Keep looking on, and hold yourself in check.\
          You can tell them to stop their foolishness,\
          but seek to win them over with nice words,\
          even though you\'92ll surely not convince them,\
[350] because the day they meet their fate has come.                                                \
          I\'92ll tell you something else\'97keep it in mind.\
          When wise Athena puts it in my mind,\
          I\'92ll nod my head to you. When you see that,\
          take all the weapons of war lying there,\
          in the hall, and put them in a secret place,\
          all of them, in the lofty storage room.\
          When the suitors notice they\'92ve gone missing\
          and ask about them, you must deceive them\
          with reassuring words:\
          \
          \'91I\'92ve placed them \
[360] well beyond the smoke, since they\'92re no longer               \
          like the weapons Odysseus left behind\
          when he went off to Troy. They\'92re all tarnished\'97\
          the fire has breathed on them too many times.                                           \
          Beyond that, the son of Cronos has put\
          a greater worry in my heart that you,\
          after too much wine, may start up a fight\
          amongst yourselves and then hurt each other,\
          dishonouring your courtship and the feast.\
          For iron attracts a man all on its own.\'92\
          \
[370] \'93But leave behind a pair of swords, two spears,                                         \
          and two ox-hide shields, for the two of us\
          to grab up when we make a rush at them,\
          while Pallas Athena and Counselor Zeus\
          will keep the suitors\'92 minds preoccupied.\
          I\'92ll tell you something else\'97keep it in mind.\
          If you are my son and truly of our blood,                                                                       \
          let no one hear Odysseus is back home.\
          Don\'92t let Laertes know or the swineherd,\
          or any servants, or Penelope herself.\
[380] You and I alone will investigate                                                \
          how the women feel, and we\'92ll check out\
          some of the serving men, to discover\
          if any of them fears and honours us\
          in his heart\'97and the ones with no respect,\
          who discredit you for being the man you are.\'94\
          \
          Then his splendid son answered him and said:\
          \'93Father,\
          I think you\'92ll later come to recognize\
          my spirit, for no timidity of mind                                                                                           \
          possesses me. But still, I do not think\
[390] your plan will benefit the two of us.                                                                     \
          I\'92d ask you to consider this\'97you\'92ll spend\
          a long time simply testing every man,\
          as you visit the farms, while those others,\
          in their proud way, relax inside your halls\
          and consume your goods without restraint.\
          But I\'92d suggest you learn about the women,\
          those disgracing you and the guiltless ones.\
          As for men on the estates, I\'92d prefer\
          we didn\'92t test them. We can deal with that\
[400] at a later time, if you truly recognize                                        \
          some sign from Zeus, who bears the aegis.\'94                                                                  \
          \
          So the two men talked about these things together.\
          Meanwhile, the well-built ship which brought Telemachus\
          from Pylos with all his comrades had reached Ithaca.\
          Once they\'92d come inside the deep water harbour,\
          they hauled the black ship up on shore. Eager servants\
          carried off their weapons and without delay\
          took the splendid gifts to Clytius\'92 home.\
          They also sent a herald to Odysseus\'92 house,\
[410] to report to wise Penelope, telling her                                              \
          Telemachus had gone to visit the estates                                                                                      \
          and had told the ship to sail off for the city,\
          in case the noble queen might get sick at heart\
          and shed some tears. This herald and the swineherd met\
          because they\'92d both been sent off with the same report\
          to tell the queen. When they reached the royal palace,\
          the herald spoke out in front of female servants:\
          \'93My queen, your dear son has just returned.\'94\
          \
          But the swineherd came up close to Penelope\
[420] and gave her all the details her dear son                                          \
          had ordered him to say. Once he\'92d told her                                                                              \
          every detail he\'92d been asked to mention to her,\
          he went off, leaving the courtyard and the hall,\
          back to his pigs. The suitors were unhappy,\
          their hearts dismayed, and they departed from the hall,\
          past the large courtyard wall. There, before the gates,\
          they sat down. The first one of them to say something\
          was Eurymachus, son of Polybus: \
          \'93O my friends,\
          to tell the truth, in his great arrogance\
[430] Telemachus has carried out his trip,                                                                      \
          a great achievement. We never thought\
          he would complete it. So come on now,\
          let\'92s launch a black ship, the best one we have,\
          collect some sailors, a crew of rowers,\
          so they can quickly carry a report\
          to those other men to go home at once.\'942                                                                      \
          \
          No sooner had he said all this, than Amphinomus,\
          turning in his place, saw a ship in the deep harbour.\
          Men were bringing down the sail, others holding oars.\
[440] With a hearty laugh, he then addressed his comrades:                                   \
          \'93Don\'92t bother with a message any more.\
          Here they are back home. Either some god\
          gave them news, or they saw his ship themselves,\
          as it sailed past, but couldn\'92t catch it.\'94\
          \
          He spoke. They all got up and went to the sea shore,\
          then quickly dragged the black ship up onto dry ground,\
          while eager attendants carried off their weapons.                                                               \
          They themselves went to the meeting place together.\
          No one else was allowed to sit there with them,\
[450] no old or younger men. Then Antinous addressed them,                           \
          son of Eupeithes:\
          \'93Well, this is bad news\'97\
          the gods have delivered the man from harm.\
          Our lookouts sat each day on windy heights,\
          always in successive shifts. At sunset,\
          we never spent the night on shore, but sailed\
          over the sea in our swift ship, waiting\
          for sacred Dawn, as we set our ambush\
          for Telemachus, so we could capture\
          and then kill him. Meanwhile, some god                                                                         \
[460] has brought him home. But let\'92s think about                            \
          a sad end for Telemachus right here\
          and ensure he doesn\'92t get away from us.\
          For as long as he\'92s alive, I don\'92t think\
          we\'92ll be successful in what we\'92re doing.\
          He himself is clever, shrewd in counsel,\
          and now people don\'92t regard us well at all.\
          So come now, before he calls Achaeans\
          to assembly. I don\'92t think he will give up.\
          He\'92ll get angry and stand up to proclaim\
[470] to everyone how we planned to kill him                                   \
          and how we didn\'92t get him. The people\
          will resent us, once they learn about                                                                                    \
          our nasty acts. Take care they do not harm us\
          and force us out, away from our own land,\
          until we reach a foreign country. And so,\
          let\'92s move first\'97capture him out in the fields,\
          far from the city, or else on the road. \
          We ourselves will keep the property he owns,\
          his wealth, too, and share it appropriately\
[480] among us. As for possession of the house,                                                      \
          that\'92s something we should give his mother\
          and the man who marries her. However,\
          if what I\'92ve been saying displeases you, \
          and you\'92d prefer he should remain alive,\
          retaining all the riches of his fathers,\
          then let\'92s not keep on gathering in this place,\
          consuming his supply of pleasant things.\
          Instead, let each man carry on his courtship                                                                \
          from his own home, seeking to prevail with gifts.\
[490] Then she can marry the one who offers most                           \
          and comes to her as her destined husband.\'94\
          \
          He finished. They all sat quiet, not saying a thing.\
          Then Amphinomus spoke out and addressed them,\
          splendid son of lord Nisus, Areteias\'92 son\'97\
          leader of the suitors from Dulichium,\
          land rich in grass and wheat. Penelope found him\
          especially pleasant because of how he talked,\
          for he understood things well. With good intentions,\
          he spoke to them and said:\
          \'93My friends,                                                                                \
[500] I wouldn\'92t want to slay Telemachus.                                                                     \
          It\'92s reprehensible to kill someone\
          of royal blood. But first let\'92s ask the gods\
          for their advice. If great Zeus\'92 oracles\
          approve the act, I myself will kill him\
          and tell all other men to do so, too.\
          But if the gods decline, I say we stop.\'94\
          \
          Amphinomus finished. They agreed with what he\'92d said.\
          So they immediately got up and went away\
          to Odysseus\'92 house. Once they reached the palace,\
[510] they sat down on the polished chairs. By that point,                                         \
          wise Penelope had thought of something else\'97\
          to put in an appearance before the suitors,                                                                                \
          despite their arrogance, because she\'92d heard about\
          the destruction of her son there in the hall.\
          The herald Medon, who\'92d heard their plans, had told her.\
          So she set off on her way toward the hall,\
          accompanied by her attendant women.\
          As soon as the noble lady reached the suitors,\
          she stood beside the door post of the well-built room\
[520] and, holding a bright veil across her countenance,                                            \
          addressed Antinous, reprimanding him:\
          \'93Antinous, though you\'92re an arrogant man\
          and come up with devious schemes, people say\
          you are the best among those men your age\
          at offering advice and making speeches.\
          But you don\'92t seem to be a man like that.                                                                      \
          You madman, why devise a fatal plan\
          to kill Telemachus and disregard\
          the things involved with being a suppliant,\
[530] who has Zeus as witness? It\'92s impiety                                        \
          to plan evil things for one another.\
          Do you not know your father came here\
          a fugitive, afraid of his own people?\
          They were extremely angry with him,\
          because he\'92d joined with Taphian pirates\
          to cause trouble for the Thesprotians,\
          who were allied with us. Those men wished\
          to kill him, rip out his heart, and devour\
          his huge and pleasant livelihood. But then,\
[540] Odysseus restrained them, kept them in check,                                               \
          for all their eagerness. Now you eat up\
          that man\'92s home without paying anything,\
          court his wife, attempt to kill his son,\
          and cause me much distress. So stop all this,\
          I tell you, and order other suitors\
          to do the same.\'94\
          \
          Then Eurymachus, \
          son of Polybus, answered her:\
          \'93Wise Penelope,\
          daughter of Icarius, cheer up. Don\'92t let\
          these things concern your heart. No man living\
[550] and no man born and no one yet to be                                    \
          will lay hands on your son Telemachus,\
          not while I\'92m alive, gazing on the earth. \
          I tell you this\'97and it will truly happen\'97                                                                       \
          that man\'92s black blood will quickly saturate\
          my spear, for Odysseus, sacker of cities,\
          also set me on his knees many times\
          and put roast meat into my hands and held\
          red wine up for me. Thus, Telemachus\
          is far the dearest of all men to me.\
[560] I say to him\'97don\'92t be afraid of death,                                                               \
          not from the suitors, but there\'92s no way out\
          when death comes from the gods.\'94\
          \
          He said these words to ease her mood, while he himself\
          was planning her son\'92s death. But Penelope\
          went to her bright room upstairs and wept there                                                                 \
          for Odysseus, her dear husband, until sweet sleep,\
          cast by bright-eyed Athena, spread across her eyelids.\
          At evening the fine swineherd came to Odysseus\
          and to his son, busy getting dinner ready.\
[570] They\'92d killed a boar, one year old. Then Athena                              \
          approached Odysseus, Laertes\'92 son, and touched him\
          with her wand to make him an old man once again.\
          She put shabby clothes around his body, just in case\
          the swineherd, by looking up, would recognize him\
          and then go off to tell faithful Penelope,\
          and thus fail to keep the secret in his heart.\
          Telemachus addressed the swineherd first and said:                                                         \
          \'93Good Eumaeus, you\'92ve come. What news is there\
          in the city? Are those arrogant suitors\
[580] back in the house already from their ambush,                                           \
          or are they still out there watching for me\
          as I travel on my journey homeward?\'94\
          \
          Then, swineherd Eumaeus, you answered him and said:\
          \'93I didn\'92t bother to make enquiries \
          or ask about such things on my travels\
          through the town. Once I\'92d given my report,\
          my heart told me to get myself back here\
          as fast as possible. A swift messenger,\
          who came from your companions, met me,\
[590] a herald. Your mother first got the report                                 \
          from him. But I found out something else,                                                                    \
          which I saw with my own eyes. As I walked\
          above the city, by the hill of Hermes,\
          I saw a fast ship coming in our harbour,\
          with lots of men aboard and loaded down\
          with shields and two-edged spears. I thought\
          it could be them, but I\'92m not certain.\'94\
          \
          Eumaeus finished. Telemachus with a smile,\
          full of confidence and strength, allowed his eyes\
[600] to glance over to his father, avoiding contact                                   \
          with the swineherd. Then, once they\'92d finished working\
          and dinner was prepared, they dined. Their hearts\
          did not lack a thing\'97they shared the meal as equals.\
          When they\'92d had food and drink to their heart\'92s content,                                         \
          they thought of rest, and so they took the gift of sleep.}