{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf460
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural\qc

\f0\fs24 \cf0 BOOK SEVENTEEN\
Odysseus Goes to the Palace as a Beggar\
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural
\cf0 [Telemachus leaves Eumaeus and Odysseus at the farm, telling the swineherd that the beggar (Odysseus) must go to the city; Telemachus is welcomed in the palace by Eurycleia and his mother; Telemachus joins the suitors; Peiraeus leads in Theoclymenus; Theoclymenus and Telemachus dine with Penelope; Telemachus tells Penelope about his journey; Theoclymenus makes a prophecy of Odysseus\'92 return; Eumaeus and Odysseus leave the farm for the city; they meet Melanthius, the goat herder, on the way, who insults them; Eumaeus and Odysseus arrive at the palace, meet Odysseus\'92 old dog, Argus, who recognizes him and dies; Eumaeus enters the palace and joins Telemachus at dinner; Odysseus sits by the entrance way; Telemachus offers food to the disguised Odysseus, who then starts begging from the suitors; Melanthius and Antinous insult Eumaeus and Odysseus; Odysseus tells Antinous his story, they trade insults, and Antinous throws a foot stool at Odysseus and hits him; Penelope summons Eumaeus to her, asks him to call the disguised beggar to her; Odysseus tell Eumaeus that he\'92ll meet Penelope in the evening, not now; Eumaeus tells Penelope, talks to Telemachus, and returns to the farm, leaving the feast still in progress.]\
\
          As soon as rose-fingered early Dawn appeared,\
          Telemachus, dear son of god-like Odysseus,\
          tied some fine sandals on his feet, took a strong spear,\
          well suited to his grip, and, as he headed off\
          towards the city, spoke out to the swineherd:\
          \'93Old friend, I\'92m leaving for the city,\
          so my mother can observe me. I don\'92t think\
          her dreadful grieving and her sorry tears\
          will stop until she sees me for herself.\
  [10] So I\'92m telling you to do as follows\'97                                         \
          take this wretched stranger to the city.                                                                               \
          Once there, he can beg food from anyone\
          who\'92ll offer him some bread and cups of water.\
          I can\'92t take on the weight of everyone,\
          not when I have these sorrows in my heart.\
          As for the stranger, if he\'92s very angry,\
          things will be worse for him. Those are the facts,\
          and I do like to speak the truth.\'94\
          \
          Odysseus,\
          that resourceful man, then answered him and said:\
  [20] \'93Friend, I myself am not all that eager                                      \
          to be held back here. For a beggar man \
          it\'92s better to ask people for a meal\
          in the city instead of in the fields.\
          Whoever\'92s willing will give me something. \
          At my age it\'92s not appropriate for me                                                                                 \
          to stay any longer in the farmyard,\
          obeying everything a master orders.\
          No. So be on your way. This man here,\
          who you give orders to, will take me there,\
  [30] as soon as I\'92ve warmed up beside the fire                                 \
          and the sun get hot. These clothes I\'92m wearing\
          are miserably bad, and I\'92m afraid\
          the morning frost may be too much for me\'97\
          you say the city is a long way off.\'94\
          \
          Odysseus finished. Telemachus walked away,\
          across the farmyard, moving with rapid strides.\
          He was sowing seeds of trouble for the suitors. \
          As he entered the beautifully furnished house,\
          he carried in his spear and set it in its place,\
  [40] against a looming pillar. Then he moved inside,                                                            \
          across the stone threshold. His nurse Eurycleia \
          saw him well before the others, while spreading fleeces\
          on the finely crafted chairs. She burst out crying,\
          rushed straight up to him, while there gathered round them\
          other female servants of stout-hearted Odysseus.\
          They kissed his head and shoulders in loving welcome.\
          Then from her chamber wise Penelope emerged,\
          looking like Artemis or golden Aphrodite.\
          She embraced the son she loved, while shedding tears,\
  [50] and kissed his head and both his beautiful eyes.                                                   \
          Through her tears, she spoke to him\'97her words had wings:                                   \
          \'93You\'92ve come, Telemachus, you sweet light.\
          I thought I\'92d never see you any more, \
          when you secretly went off to Pylos\
          in your ship, against my wishes, seeking\
          some report of your dear father. So come,\
          describe for me how you ran into him.\'94\
          \
          Shrewd Telemachus then answered her and said:\
          \'93Mother, don\'92t encourage me to grieve,\
  [60] or get the heart inside my chest stirred up.                                                    \
          I\'92ve just escaped being utterly destroyed.\
          But have a bath, and pick fresh clothing\
          for your body. Then, with your attendants\
          go to the room upstairs, and promise\
          all the gods you\'92ll offer perfect sacrifices,                                                                        \
          if Zeus will somehow bring to fulfillment\
          actions which will give us retribution.\
          I\'92ll go to the place where we assemble,\
          so I can call upon a stranger, a man\
  [70] who came with me on my trip from Pylos.                                                    \
          I sent him ahead with my noble comrades,\
          telling Peiraeus to take him to his home,\
          to treat him kindly, and to honour him,\
          until the time I got there.\'94\
          \
          Telemachus finished.\
          Penelope was quiet\'97no winged words flew from her.\
          She bathed herself and took fresh clothing for her body.\
          Then she promised she\'92d offer perfect sacrifice\
          to all the gods, if Zeus would somehow bring about\
          those actions which would give them retribution.                                                               \
  [80] Telemachus walked through the hall, gripping his spear.                             \
          Two swift dogs went with him. Athena poured on him\
          such marvelous grace that, as he moved along,\
          all people gazed at him. The arrogant suitors\
          thronged around him, making gentle conversation,\
          but deep in their hearts they were planning trouble.\
          He avoided the main crowd of them and took a seat\
          where Mentor and Antiphus and Halitherses sat,\
          companions of his father\'92s from many years ago.                                                               \
          They asked him all kinds of questions. Then Peiraeus,\
  [90] the well-known spearman, approached, leading the stranger          \
          through the city to the place where they assembled.1\
          Telemachus did not turn his back for very long\
          upon the stranger, but went up to him. Peiraeus\
          was the first to speak:\
          \'93Telemachus,\
          send some women quickly to my home,\
          so I may have those gifts sent here to you\
          which Menelaus gave you.\'94\
          \
          Shrewd Telemachus\
          then answered him and said:\
          \'93Peiraeus,\
          we don\'92t know how these matters will turn out.\
[100] If these overbearing suitors kill me                                           \
          in my own halls in secret and divide                                                                                    \
          all my father\'92s goods amongst themselves,\
          I\'92d prefer you keep those gifts yourself\'97\
          enjoy them\'97rather than any of those men.\
          But if I sow a lethal fate for them,\
          then bring them to the house, and be happy\
          with me, for I will be rejoicing.\'94\
          \
          As he said this, he led the long-suffering stranger\
          towards the house. When they reached the stately palace,\
[110] they put their cloaks down on the seats and armchairs,                                \
          then went into the polished tubs to have a bath.\
          After the attending women had washed both men,\
          rubbed them down with oil, and wrapped around them\
          woolen cloaks and tunics, they came out from the bath                                               \
          and sat down on the chairs. A servant brought in water\
          in a lovely golden pitcher and poured it out\
          in a silver basin, so they could wash their hands.\
          Beside them she then set up a polished table.\
          The worthy housekeeper brought bread and set it out,\
[120] then added lots of meat, giving freely from her stores.                                  \
          Telemachus\'92 mother sat across from him,\
          by the door post of the hall, leaning from her seat\
          to spin fine threads of yarn. They stretched out their hands\
          to take the fine food prepared and set before them.\
          When they\'92d had food and drink to their heart\'92s content, \
          the first to speak to them was wise Penelope:                                                                         \
          \'93Telemachus, once I\'92ve gone up to my room,\
          I\'92ll lie down in bed, which has become for me\
          a place where I lament, always wet with tears,\
[130] ever since Odysseus went to Troy                                             \
          with Atreus\'92 sons. Yet you don\'92t dare\
          to tell me clearly of your father\'92s trip,\
          even before the haughty suitors come\
          into the house, no word of what you learned.\'94\
          \
          Shrewd Telemachus then answered her and said:\
          \'93All right then, mother, I\'92ll tell you the truth.\
          We went to Pylos and reached Nestor,\
          shepherd of his people. He welcomed us                                                                         \
          in his lofty home with hospitality\
[140] and kindness, as a father for a son                                            \
          who\'92s just returned from far-off places\
          after many years\'97that\'92s how Nestor\
          and his splendid sons looked after me\
          with loving care. But of brave Odysseus,\
          alive or dead, he told me he\'92d heard nothing\
          from any man on earth. He sent me off\
          with horses and a well-built chariot\
          to that famous spearman Menelaus,\
          son of Atreus. There I saw Argive Helen,\
[150] for whom many Trojans and Achaeans                                     \
          struggled hard, because that\'92s what gods had willed.\
          Menelaus, skilled at war shouts, at once                                                                           \
          asked me why I\'92d come to lovely Sparta,\
          what I was looking for. I told him the truth,\
          all the details. He answered me and said:\
          \
          \'91That\'92s disgraceful!  They want to lie down\
          in the bed of a courageous warrior,\
          when they themselves are cowards\'97just as if\
          a doe has put two new-born suckling fawns\
[160] in a mighty lion\'92s thicket, so they can sleep,                                   \
          and roams mountain slopes and grassy valleys \
          seeking pasture, and then the lion comes\
          back to that lair and brings a dismal fate                                                            \
          for both of them\'97that\'92s how Odysseus\
          will bring those men to their disastrous end.\
          By Father Zeus, Athena, and Apollo,\
          how I wish he could be as he was once\
          in well-built Lesbos, in a wrestling match,\
          when he stood and fought Philomeleides,\
[170] threw him decisively, and all Achaeans                           \
          felt great joy\'97if he were that sort of man,\
          Odysseus might well mingle with the suitors,\
          and they\'92d all meet death, a bitter courtship.\
          But as for these things you\'92re asking me about,\
          begging me to speak, I\'92ll not evade them\
          or lead you astray. No. I won\'92t conceal\
          or bury a single word that I was told\
          by that infallible Old Man of the Sea.                                                                    \
          He said that he had seen Odysseus\
[180] on an island, suffering great distress                                 \
          in nymph Calypso\'92s home\'97she keeps him there\
          by force. He can\'92t get to his native land\
          because he has no ship available,\
          no oars, and no companions, men who might\
          transport him on the broad back of the sea.\'92\
          \
          \'93That\'92s what famous spearman Menelaus said,\
          the son of Atreus. When I was finished,\
          I came home, and the immortals gave me\
          favourable winds which quickly carried me\
          back to my native land.\'94\
          \
[190] Telemachus\'92 words                       \
          stirred the heart within her chest. Then among the group\
          Theoclymenus, a godlike man, spoke out:\
          \'93Noble wife of Laertes\'92 son, Odysseus,\
          Menelaus has no certain knowledge.\
          You should attend to what I have to say,\
          for I will make a truthful prophecy\
          and not conceal a thing. Now, let Zeus,\
          first among the gods, act as my witness,\
          and this table welcoming your guests, \
[200] and the hearth of excellent Odysseus,                                                                \
          which I\'92ve reached, that Odysseus is, in fact,\
          already in his native land, sitting still\
          or moving, learning of these wicked acts.\
          He\'92s sowing trouble for every suitor.                                                                                    \
          That\'92s how I interpret that bird omen\
          I saw, while sitting on the well-decked ship\'97\
          that\'92s what I said then to Telemachus.\'94\
          \
          Wise Penelope then answered him and said:\
          \'93Ah stranger, I wish what you\'92ve just said\
[210] might come about. Then you\'92d quickly learn                            \
          how kind we are, how many gifts I\'92d give\'97\
          anyone you met would call you blessed.\'94\
          \
          Thus they talked to one another of these things.\
          Meanwhile, outside in front of Odysseus\'92 palace,\
          the suitors were enjoying themselves, throwing discus\
          and tossing javelins on a level piece of ground,\
          as was their custom, displaying their arrogance.\
          But when it was time for dinner and the sheep arrived,                                                \
          coming from the fields in all directions, with those\
[220] who used to lead them there, Medon spoke to them.                                      \
          He was the herald they liked more than all the rest,\
          and he was present with them when they feasted:\
          \'93Young men, now you\'92ve entertained your hearts\
          with tests of skill, so come inside the house,\
          and we\'92ll prepare a meal. There\'92s nothing wrong\
          with eating when it\'92s time to have some food.\'94\
          \
          Medon spoke. Agreeing with what he\'92d said, they stood up\
          and moved away. When they reached the stately home,\
          they set their cloaks down on the seats and armchairs.\
[230] Men sacrificed huge sheep and goats with lots of fat.                                              \
          They killed a heifer from the herd, plump hogs as well,\
          as they prepared the meal.\
          Meanwhile Odysseus\
          and the loyal swineherd were hastening to leave,\
          moving from the fields into the city. Eumaeus,\
          that outstanding man, was the first to speak. He said:\
          \'93Stranger, since you\'92re keen to reach the city,\
          as my master ordered, and get there today\'97\
          myself, I\'92d rather leave you at the farm\
          to guard the place, but I respect and fear him,\
[240] for he may reprimand me afterwards,                                      \
          and a master\'92s punishment can be severe\'97\
          so come now, let\'92s be off. Most of the day                                                                      \
          has already passed, and as evening comes\
          you\'92ll quickly sense it\'92s getting colder.\'94\
          \
          Resourceful Odysseus then answered him and said:\
          \'93I see that. I know. You\'92re talking to a man\
          who understands. So let\'92s be setting out.\
          You yourself can lead me the whole way.\
          But if you\'92ve got a pole somewhere that\'92s cut\
[250] for you to lean on, then give it to me.                                                                \
          For you did say the road is slippery.\'94\
          \
          Odysseus finished, then threw around his shoulders\
          his ragged bag full of holes, with a twisted strap.\
          Eumaeus gave him a staff he liked, and then\
          the two of them set off. The dogs and herdsmen                                                                 \
          stayed behind to guard the farmyard. The swineherd\
          led his master to the city, like a beggar,\
          leaning on a stick, an old and miserable man,\
          with his body wrapped in wretched clothing.\
[260] But as they walked along the rugged pathway,                                                       \
          getting near the city, they reached a well-made spring,\
          with a steady flow, where townsfolk drew their water,\
          built by Ithacus, Neritus, and Polyctor.2\
          Around it was a poplar grove, fed by its waters.\
          They grew on all sides of the spring. Cold water flowed\
          down from a rock above, and on the top of that                                                                  \
          an altar had been dedicated to the nymphs,\
          where all the people passing by made offerings.\
          Here Melanthius, son of Dolius, met them\'97\
[270] he was driving on some goats, the finest ones                                  \
          in all the herds, to serve as dinner for the suitors.\
          Two herdsmen followed with him. When he saw them,\
          Melanthius started yelling insults. What he said\
          was shameful and abusive\'97it stirred Odysseus\'92 heart.\
          \'93Now here we have a truly filthy man\
          leading on another filthy scoundrel.\
          As always, god matches like with like.\
          You miserable swineherd, where are you going\
          with this disgusting pig, this beggar man,\
[280] a tedious bore who\'92ll interrupt our feasts?                                                              \
          He\'92ll scratch his shoulders on many doorposts,\
          begging scraps\'97no need for sword or cauldron.3\
          If you\'92d let me have him guard my farmyard,\
          clean out the pens, and carry tender shoots\
          to my young goats, then he could drink down whey\
          and put some muscle on those thighs of his.\
          But since he\'92s picked up his thieving habits,\
          he won\'92t want to get too close to real work.\
          No. He\'92d rather creep around the country\
[290] and beg food to fill his bottomless gut.                                                              \
          I\'92ll tell you something\'97and this will happen\'97\
          if he reaches godlike Odysseus\'92 home,                                                                               \
          many a footstool hurled by real men\
          will hit his ribs and all parts of his head,\
          as he\'92s tossed around throughout the house.\'94\
          \
          Melanthius finished, and as he moved on past them,\
          in his stupidity he kicked Odysseus on the hip.\
          But that didn\'92t push Odysseus off the pathway. \
          He stood there without budging. He was wondering\
[300] whether he should charge and kill him with his staff,                                      \
          or grab him by the waist, lift him up, and smash his head\
          down on the ground. But he hung on, controlling \
          what was in his heart. Eumaeus looked at the man,\
          scolded him, then, lifting up his hands in prayer, \
          he cried aloud:\
          \'93Fountain nymphs, daughters of Zeus,                                                 \
          if for your sake Odysseus ever burned \
          pieces of thigh from lambs or from young goats,\
          richly wrapped in fat, grant this prayer for me\'97\
          let my master come, guided by some god.\
[310] Then he would scatter this presumption,                                                         \
          which you now, in your arrogance, display,\
          always roaming down into the city,\
          while wicked herdsmen are destroying the flock.\'94\
          \
          Then Melanthius the goatherd answered him:\
          \'93Dear me, the things this crafty mongrel says!\
          I\'92ll take him someday on a trim black ship\
          far from Ithaca\'97he can make me very rich.                                                                \
          How I wish Apollo with his silver bow\
          would strike Telemachus in his own house\
[320] this very day, or that he\'92d be overwhelmed                               \
          by those suitors, since the day Odysseus\
          will be returning home has been wiped out \
          in some land far away.\'94\
          \
          Melanthius said this\
          and left them there, as they walked slowly onward.\
          He strode ahead and quickly reached the royal palace.\
          He went in at once and sat among the suitors,\
          opposite Eurymachus, who was fond of him\
          more than the others were. Those serving at the meal\
          laid down a portion of the meat in front of him.\
[330] The respected housekeeper brought in the bread                             \
          and placed it there for him to eat.\
          Meanwhile Odysseus                                                  \
          and the loyal swineherd paused as they came closer.\
          Around them rang the music of the hollow lyre,\
          for Phemius was striking up a song to sing\
          before the suitors. Odysseus grabbed the swineherd\
          by the hand and said to him:\
          \'93Eumaeus,\
          this place surely is the splendid palace\
          belonging to Odysseus. It\'92s easy\
          to recognize, even when one sees it\
[340] among many others, for here there is                                       \
          building after building, and this courtyard\'97\
          it\'92s finished off with walls and coping stones,\
          and there\'92s a double gateway well fenced in.\
          No man could criticize a house like this.\
          I notice many men are feasting here\'97\
          smoke from cooked meat is rising from the house,                                              \
          and a lyre is playing. A god made that\
          as our companion at a banquet.\'94\
          \
          Then, swineherd Eumaeus, you answered him and said:\
[350] \'93You recognized it easily enough\'97                                           \
          for in other things you\'92re quite perceptive.\
          But come, let\'92s consider how this business\
          will be carried out. Either you go first\
          and move inside the finely furnished house\
          to join the suitors, while I stay outside,\
          or, if you wish, stay here. I\'92ll go ahead.\
          But don\'92t hang around for long, just in case\
          someone sees you here outside and hits you\
          or throws something. You should consider that,\
          I tell you.\'94 \
          \
[360] Long-suffering lord Odysseus                                      \
          then said to Eumaeus:\
          \'93I know. I see that.\
          You\'92re talking to a man who understands.\
          But you go on ahead. I\'92ll stay out here.\
          Having objects thrown at me or being hit\
          is nothing new. My heart can bear all that,\
          since I\'92ve put up with many hardships\
          in war and on the waves. So let all this\
          be added in with those. There is no way\
          someone can hide a ravenous stomach\'97\
[370] that torment which brings men so many troubles.                                \
          Because of it, they launch their well-built ships\
          and transport evil to their enemies\
          across the restless sea.\'94\
          \
          And so these two men                                                  \
          talked to each other about these things. Then a dog\
          lying there raised its head and pricked up its ears.\
          It was Argus, brave Odysseus\'92 hunting dog,\
          whom he himself had brought up many years ago.\
          But before he could enjoy being with his dog,\
          he left for sacred Troy. In earlier days, young men\
[380] would take the dog to hunt wild goats, deer, and rabbits,                           \
          but now, with his master gone, he lay neglected\
          in the piles of dung left there by mules and cattle,\
          heaped up before the doors until Odysseus\'92 servants\
          took it as manure for some large field. Argus lay there,                                                \
          covered in fleas. Then, when he saw Odysseus,\
          who was coming closer, Argus wagged his tail\
          and dropped his ears. But he no longer had the strength\
          to approach his master. Odysseus looked away\
          and brushed aside a tear\'97he did so casually \
[390] to hide it from Eumaeus. Then he questioned him:                                           \
          \'93Eumaeus, it\'92s strange this dog is lying here,\
          in the dung. He has a handsome body.\
          I\'92m not sure if his speed once matched his looks\
          or if he\'92s like those table dogs men have,\
          ones their masters raise and keep for show.\'94                                                               \
          \
          Then, swineherd Eumaeus, you answered him and said:\
          \'93Yes, this dog belongs to a man who died\
          somewhere far away. If he had the form\
          and acted as he did when Odysseus\
[400] left him and went to Troy, you\'92d quickly see                            \
          his speed and strength, and then you\'92d be amazed.\
          No wild animal he chased escaped him\
          in deep thick woods,  for he could track a scent.\
          He\'92s in a bad way now. His master\'92s dead\
          in some foreign land, and careless women\
          don\'92t look after him. For when their masters                                                              \
          no longer exercise their power, slaves\
          have no desire to do their proper work.\
          Far-seeing Zeus steals half the value of a man\
[410] the day he\'92s taken and becomes a slave.\'94                                                        \
          \
          This said, Eumaeus went inside the stately palace,\
          straight into the hall to join the noble suitors.\
          But once he\'92d seen Odysseus after nineteen years,\
          the dark finality of death at once seized Argus.\
          As the swineherd Eumaeus came inside the house,\
          godlike Telemachus was the first to see him,\
          well before the others. He quickly summoned him\
          by nodding. Eumaeus looked around, then picked up                                                    \
          a stool lying where a servant usually sat\
[420] to carve large amounts of meat to serve the suitors,                                         \
          when they feasted in the house. He took this stool,\
          placed it by Telemachus\'92 table, facing him,\
          and then sat down. Meanwhile, a herald brought him\
          a portion of the meat, set it in front of him,\
          and lifted some bread for him out of the basket.\
          Odysseus came into the house behind Eumaeus,\
          looking like an old and miserable beggar,\
          leaning on his staff, his body dressed in rags.\
          He sat on the ash wood threshold in the doorway,\
[430] propping his back against a post of cypress wood,                                              \
          which a craftsman had once planed with skill                                                                         \
          and set in true alignment. Then Telemachus\
          called the swineherd to him and, taking a whole loaf \
          from the fine basket and as much meat as he could hold\
          in both his hands, he spoke to him, saying:\
          \'93Take this food, and give it to the stranger.\
          Tell him he can move among the suitors\
          and beg from each of them in person.\
          When a man\'92s in need, they say that shame\
          is not a good companion.\'94\
          \
[440] Telemachus spoke.                     \
          Once he\'92d heard these words, Eumaeus went and stood\
          beside Odysseus, then spoke\'97his words had wings:\
          \'93Stranger, Telemachus gives you this food                                                                     \
          and invites you to move around and beg\
          among the suitors, each in turn. He says,\
          when one\'92s in need, it\'92s no good being ashamed.\'94\
          \
          Resourceful Odysseus then answered him and said: \
          \'93May lord Zeus, I pray, grant Telemachus\
          be blessed among all men, get everything\
          he may desire in his heart.\'94\
          \
[450] Once he\'92d said this,                               \
          he took the food in his two hands and set it down\
          right there at his feet, on his tattered bag, and ate,\
          while the minstrel sang his song throughout the hall.\
          When he\'92d eaten and the godlike singer finished,\
          the suitors were making an uproar in the room.\
          But Athena approached Odysseus, Laertes\'92 son,                                                                   \
          and urged him to collect bread from the suitors,\
          so he might find out those who did respect the law\
          and those who flouted their traditions. Even so,\
[460] she wouldn\'92t let any man escape destruction.                                                         \
          Odysseus then moved off to beg for scraps of bread,\
          holding out his hand to each of them on every side,\
          starting on the right, as if he\'92d been a beggar\
          for years and years. They pitied him, gave him bread,\
          and wondered about him, asking one another\
          who he was and where he came from. Then the goatherd,\
          Melanthius, spoke out to them:\
          \'93Listen to me,                                                              \
          those of you courting the glorious queen,\
          about this stranger. I\'92ve seen him before.\
[470] The swineherd was the one who brought him here.                              \
          I don\'92t know his identity for sure\
          or the family he claims to come from.\'94\
          \
          Once he\'92d said this, Antinous turned on Eumaeus,\
          to reprimand him:\
          \'93You really are a man\
          who cares for pigs\'97why bring this fellow here\
          into the city? As far as vagrants go,\
          don\'92t we have enough apart from him,\
          greedy beggars who disrupt our banquets?\
          Do you think too few of them come here\
[480] and waste away your master\'92s livelihood,                                                        \
          so you invite this man to come as well?\'94\
          \
          Then, swineherd Eumaeus, you answered him and said:                                              \
          \'93Antinous, you may be a noble man,\
          but what you\'92ve said is not a worthy speech.\
          Who looks for strangers from another land\
          and then in person asks them to come in,\
          unless they\'92re workers in a public space\'97\
          prophets, healers of disease, house builders,\
          or inspired minstrels, who sing for our delight?\
[490] Such men are summoned to where people live                         \
          all around the boundless earth. But no one\
          invites a beggar to consume his goods.\
          You are abusive to Odysseus\'92 slaves,\
          more so than any of the other suitors,\
          especially to me. But I don\'92t care,\
          not while faithful Penelope lives here,                                                                               \
          in these halls, and godlike Telemachus.\'94\
          \
          Then prudent Telemachus replied and said:\
          \'93Be quiet. For my sake don\'92t reply to him\
[500] with a long speech. It\'92s Antinous\'92 habit                                     \
          always to offer nasty provocation,\
          to start a quarrel with abusive words.\
          He urges other men to do the same.\'94\
          \
          That said, he spoke to Antinous\'97his words had wings:\
          \'93Antinous, you really do care for me,\
          like a father for his son, when you tell me\
          with your forceful words to drive this stranger\
          from the house. May god forbid such action.\
          Take some food and give it him yourself\'97\
[510] I don\'92t mind. In fact, I\'92m asking you to do it.                                                       \
          You need not worry about my mother\
          or any of the servants in this house\
          belonging to godlike Odysseus. But still,\
          no thought like this could be inside your chest\'97\
          you\'92d much prefer to stuff yourself with food\
          than give it to another man.\'94\
          \
          Antinous\
          then answered him and said:\
          \'93Telemachus,\
          you\'92re a braggart and won\'92t control your rage.\
          What are you saying? If every suitor\
[520] offered him as much as I will, this house                                   \
          would make him keep his distance for three months.\'94\
          \
          As he said this, he picked up a stool standing there,\
          where he used to rest his shining feet while feasting,                                                       \
          raised it from below the table, and brandished it. \
          But all the other suitors offered something, \
          and so the beggar\'92s bag was filled with meat and bread.\
          Odysseus was soon going to retrace his steps\
          back to the doorway and sound out the Achaeans\
          with impunity, but he stopped by Antinous,\
          and spoke to him, saying:\
[530] \'93My friend, give something.                                                \
          You don\'92t seem to me the worst Achaean,\
          but the very best. You look like a king.\
          So you should give a bigger piece of bread\
          than these others. I\'92d publicize your fame\
          across the boundless earth. For once I, too,\
          lived among men in my home, a rich man\
          with a happy life. There were many times                                                                      \
          I\'92d give presents to some sort of vagabond,\
          no matter who he was or what he needed\
[540] when he came. I had countless servants, too,                                              \
          and many other things that people have\
          when they live well and are considered wealthy.\
          But Zeus, son of Cronos, destroyed all that.\
          That\'92s what he wanted, I suppose. He sent me\
          with some wandering pirates off to Egypt,\
          a lengthy voyage, to do away with me.\
          I moored my curving ships in Egypt\'92s river,\
          and told my loyal comrades to stay there\
          with the ships and guard them. I sent out scouts                                                      \
[550] to go up to the lookouts. But the crew,                                                              \
          giving way to impulse and counting on\
          their strength, quickly began to destroy\
          the attractive farms of the Egyptians,\
          carrying off the women and young children,\
          while slaughtering the men. The cry went up,\
          and soon it reached the city. Hearing noise,\
          the people came as soon as dawn appeared\'97\
          the entire plain was filled with men on foot\
          and in their chariots and with gleaming bronze.\
[560] Then Zeus, who hurls the thunderbolt, threw down                  \
          a dreadful panic on my comrades. None of them\
          dared stand and face up to the enemy.\
          Disaster loomed for us from every side.\
          With their sharp bronze they killed a lot of us,                                                         \
          but others they led off while still alive\
          so they could be compelled to work for them.\
          They gave me to a stranger they had met,\
          bound for Cyprus, Dmetor, son of Iasus,\
          a powerful man who was king of Cyprus.\
[570] From there I reached this place in great distress.\'94                                  \
          \
          Then Antinous answered him and said:\
          \'93What god\
          sent this nuisance to interrupt our feast?\
          Get away from my table\'97over there,\
          in the middle, or you\'92ll soon find yourself\
          in a harsher place than Cyprus or in Egypt.\
          You\'92re an insolent and shameless beggar\'97\
          you come up to every man, one by one, \
          and they give you things without holding back,                                                        \
          for there\'92s no check or scruple when one gives\
[580] from someone else\'92s goods, and each of them                          \
          has plenty of supplies in front of him.\'94\
          \
          Resourceful Odysseus then moved back and replied:\
          \'93Well now, it seems as if that mind of yours\
          doesn\'92t match your looks\'97you\'92d refuse to give\
          even a grain of salt from your own house \
          to a follower of yours, and now you sit \
          in someone else\'92s house and do not dare\
          to take some bread and offer it to me.\
          And yet there\'92s plenty right in front of you.\'94\
          \
[590] Odysseus finished. Antinous in his heart                                          \
          was even angrier than before. He glared at him,\
          then, with a scowl, replied\'97his words had wings:\
          \'93I no longer think you\'92ll leave this hall unharmed,                                                \
          now that you\'92ve begun to babble insults.\'94\
          \
          As he said this, he grabbed the stool and threw it.\
          It hit the bottom of Odysseus\'92 right shoulder,\
          where it joins the back. But he stood firm, like a rock\'97\
          what Antinous had thrown didn\'92t make him stagger.\
          He shook his head in silence, making cruel plans\
[600] deep in his heart. He went back to the door, sat there,                                  \
          set down his well-filled bag, and addressed the suitors: \
          \'93Listen to me, you suitors of the splendid queen,\
          so I can say what the heart in my chest prompts.\
          There\'92s no pain in a man\'92s heart, no grieving,                                                           \
          when he\'92s hit fighting for his own possessions, \
          for cattle or white sheep. But Antinous\
          struck me because of my wretched belly,\
          that curse which gives men all kinds of trouble.\
          So if beggars have their gods and Furies,\
[610] may Antinous come to a fatal end,                                                                        \
          before his wedding day.\'94\
          \
          Then Antinous, Eupeithes\'92 son,\
          gave him this reply:\
          \'93Sit still and eat, stranger,\
          or go somewhere else, just in case young men\
          drag you by your hands and feet all through the house\
          for what you say, scraping your whole body.\'94                                                             \
          \
          He finished. But all those proud men were furious,\
          and one of the arrogant young men spoke out:\
          \'93Antinous, it was wrong of you to hit\
          a wretched vagrant. And you may be doomed,\
[620] if somehow he\'92s a god come down from heaven.                                    \
          For, in fact, gods make themselves appear\
          like foreign strangers, assuming many shapes\
          and haunting cities, to investigate\
          men\'92s pride and their obedience to the laws.\'94\
          \
          That\'92s what the suitors said. However, Antinous\
          paid no attention to their words. Telemachus,\
          having seen the blow, felt pain growing in his heart.\
          But his eyelids shed no tears upon the ground.                                                                      \
          No. He shook his head in silence and kept planning\
[630] dark schemes in his heart.  But when wise Penelope                        \
          heard about the stranger being hit inside the hall,\
          she spoke to her attendant women, saying:\
          \'93How I wish that he, too, might be struck\
          by Apollo, that celebrated archer.\'94\
          \
          Then housekeeper Eurynome said to her:\
          \'93O if only our prayers could be fulfilled,\
          not one of them would see Dawn\'92s lovely throne.\'94\
          \
          Wise Penelope then answered her:\
          \'93Good nurse,\
          they\'92re all enemies hatching evil plans,\
[640] but Antinous, more than any of them,                                                                       \
          is like black fate. Some unhappy stranger\
          roams through the house, begging from the men.\
          His own need drives him to it. The others,\
          all of them, gave him gifts and filled his bag,\
          but Antinous threw a footstool at him\
          and struck him under his right shoulder.\'94\
          \
          So Penelope talked with her serving women,\
          sitting in her room, while lord Odysseus ate.\
          Then she called out to the loyal swineherd, saying:\
[650] \'93Good Eumaeus, go and ask the stranger                                  \
          to come here, so I can greet him warmly\
          and ask if he perhaps has heard about                                                                                \
          my brave Odysseus, or caught sight of him            \
          with his own eyes. He looks like a man\
          who\'92s spent a long time wandering around.\'94\
          \
          Then, swineherd Eumaeus, you answered her and said:\
          \'93I wish the Achaeans would keep quiet,\
          my queen, for he tells the kind of stories\
          which enchant one\'92s heart. I had him with me\
[660] for three nights, and for three days I kept him                         \
          in my hut. He came to me first of all,\
          while he was fleeing in secret from a ship.\
          But he never finished what he had to say\
          of his misfortunes. Just as any man\
          looks at a minstrel who sings enticing songs\
          to mortal men, ones the gods have taught him,\
          and there\'92s no end to their desire to hear,                                                                      \
          whenever he may sing, that\'92s how this man\
          enchanted me, as he sat in my home.\
[670] He claims he\'92s a friend of Odysseus\'92 father,                                                  \
          from Crete, where the race of Minos lives,\
          He\'92s come here from there, enduring troubles,\
          as he keeps wandering from place to place.\
          He insists he\'92s heard about Odysseus\'97\
          he\'92s close by, still alive in the rich land\
          of Thesprotians\'97with many treasures\
          which he\'92s going to bring back home.\'94\
          \
          Wise Penelope \
          then answered him:\
          \'93Go and call him here\'97\
          he can tell me for himself. And let the men                                                                 \
[680] keep sitting in the hall or at the door                                        \
          enjoying themselves\'97their hearts are cheerful.\
          Their own possessions lie untouched at home,\
          sweet wine and bread, which their servants eat.\
          But they fill up our house day after day,\
          butchering our cattle, fat sheep, and goats,\
          carousing and drinking our gleaming wine,\
          without restraint. So much is wasted.\
          There\'92s no one like Odysseus here who\'92ll guard\
          our house from ruin.  If Odysseus came,\
[690] got back to his native land, he and his son                               \
          would quickly take their vengeance on these men                                                \
          for their violent ways.\'94\
          \
          As Penelope said this,\
          Telemachus gave a mighty sneeze\'97it echoed\
          through the house. Penelope laughed and quickly spoke\
          these winged words to Eumaeus:\
          \'93Go call the stranger.\
          Bring him here in front of me. Did you not see\
          my son sneezing at everything I said?\
          So the complete destruction of the suitors\
          will not go unfulfilled\'97for all of them\'97\
[700] not one will escape his fatal destiny.4                                                                  \
          I\'92ll tell you something else. Lay it to heart.\
          If I see he tells me the entire truth,\
          I\'92ll dress him in fine clothes, cloak and tunic.\'94                                                           \
          \
          Penelope finished. Once Eumaeus heard her,\
          he went off and, standing beside Odysseus,\
          spoke to him\'97his words had wings:\
          \'93Honoured stranger,\
          wise Penelope is summoning you,\
          Telemachus\'92 mother. For her heart,\
          in spite of bearing much anxiety,\
[710] is telling her to ask about her husband.                                                             \
          If she knows that everything you say\
          is true, she\'92ll give you a cloak and tunic,\
          things you really need. And as for food,\
          you can beg for it throughout the country\
          and fill your stomach. Whoever wants to\
          will give it to you.\'94\
          \
          Long-suffering lord Odysseus                                              \
          then answered him:\
          \'93Eumaeus, I\'92ll tell the truth,\
          all the details, to wise Penelope,\
          daughter of Icarius, and quickly, too.\
[720] For I know Odysseus well\'97both of us                                      \
          have had the same misfortunes. But I fear\
          this abusive crowd of suitors, whose pride\
          and violence reach up to iron heaven.\
          Just now, as I was moving through the house,\
          doing nothing wrong, this man struck me\
          and caused me pain. Meanwhile Telemachus\
          couldn\'92t do a thing to stop him, nor could\
          any other man. So tell Penelope,\
          for all her eagerness, to wait right now,\
[730] there in the hall, until the sun goes down.                                                             \
          Let her ask me then about her husband\
          and the day of his return. And let me sit\
          close to the fire, for the clothes I have\
          are pitiful, as you know for yourself, \
          since I came to you first of all for help.\'94\
          \
          Odysseus finished. Once he\'92d listened to him,\
          the swineherd went away. As he crossed the threshold,\
          Penelope addressed him:\
          \'93You haven\'92t brought him,\
          Eumaeus. What does the vagrant mean by this?\
[740] Is he somehow too afraid of something,                                                           \
          or is there some other reason he\'92s ashamed?\
          He\'92s a bad beggar if he feels disgraced.\'94\
          \
          Then, swineherd Eumaeus, you answered her and said:\
          \'93What he said made sense\'97what any other man                                                   \
          would think if he was planning to avoid\
          the insolence of those presumptuous men.\
          He says you should wait around till sunset.\
          And, my queen, it would be far more fitting\
          for you to talk in person to the stranger,\
[750] to hear for yourself what he has to say.\'94                                                           \
          \
          Wise Penelope then answered him and said:\
          \'93The stranger is not stupid. For he thinks\
          about those things that well may happen.\
          I don\'92t believe there are any mortal men\
          who are as high handed as these suitors are,\
          the way they plan their wicked foolishness.\'94\
          \
          Penelope spoke. Once he\'92d told her everything,\
          the loyal swineherd joined the crowd of suitors.                                                                   \
          He quickly spoke winged words to Telemachus,\
[760] holding his head close to him, so others couldn\'92t hear:                                  \
          \'93Friend, I\'92m going to leave and guard the swine\
          and other things, your livelihood and mine.\
          You take charge of all the problems here.\
          First and foremost, protect yourself. Your heart\
          must stay alert, so you don\'92t suffer harm.\
          Many Achaeans are hatching evil plans\'97\
          may Zeus destroy them before they harm us.\'94\
          \
          Shrewd Telemachus then answered him and said:\
          \'93It will happen, old friend. Now, you should eat\
[770] before you leave. Come here in the morning,                                            \
          and bring fine animals for sacrifice.                                                                                    \
          Everything going on here is my concern,\
          mine and the immortals.\'94\
          \
          Telemachus spoke.\
          The swineherd sat down on the polished chair again.\
          Once he\'92d filled his heart with food and drink, he left, \
          returning to his pigs, through the courtyard and the hall\
          full of banqueters, who were enjoying themselves\
          with dance and song, for evening had already come.\
}