{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf460
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural\qc

\f0\fs24 \cf0 BOOK EIGHTEEN\
Odysseus and Irus the Beggar \
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural
\cf0 [Irus the beggar arrives at the palace and starts abusing Odysseus; the suitors encourage them to fight; in the scrap Odysseus knocks Irus out; Odysseus warns Amphinomus of trouble ahead; Athena makes Penelope want to appear before the suitors; Athena puts Penelope to sleep and makes her more beautiful; Penelope wakes up and goes downstairs to mix with the suitors; Telemachus and Penelope talk about the stranger; Penelope encourages the suitors to bring presents for her, and they do so; Odysseus talks to the female servants, criticizing them for assisting the suitors; Odysseus holds up the lamps for the suitors at their feast; Eurymachus makes fun of Odysseus, and Odysseus give him a heated reply; Eurymachus throws a stool at Odysseus but misses and hits the wine steward; Telemachus and Amphinomus restore order; the suitors continue feasting and then leave]\
\
          Then a vagrant from the community arrived,\
          who used to beg through all the town of Ithaca,\
          a man celebrated for his gluttonous stomach,\
          with an incessant appetite for food and drink.\
          He looked huge, but had little energy or strength.\
          He was called Arnaeus\'97his honoured mother\
          had given him that name when he was born, but now\
          all young men called him Irus, because he ran around\
          carrying messages for anyone who asked him.1\
  [10] At this point he arrived and tried to drive Odysseus                         \
          away from his own home by shouting out abuse\'97\
          his words had wings:\
          \'93Get out of the door, old man,                                         \
          or you\'92ll be dragged off by your feet. Don\'92t you see\
          how they\'92re all winking at me, telling me\
          to pull you out? As far as I\'92m concerned,\
          I\'92d be ashamed to do it. So get up,\
          or else we\'92ll fight this quarrel with our fists.\'94\
          \
          Resourceful Odysseus frowned, looked at him, and said:\
          \'93My good man, I\'92m not doing you any harm\
  [20] or shouting insults at you. Nor do I care                                   \
          if someone gives you something, even if\
          he takes a generous portion. This doorway\
          has room for both of us, and there\'92s no need\
          to begrudge what someone else may get.\
          You seem to be a vagrant, just like me\'97\
          gods are supposed to give us happiness.\
          But don\'92t provoke me too much with your fists,                                                       \
          in case you make me angry. Though I\'92m old,\
          I might stain your lips and chest with blood.\
  [30] If so, I\'92d enjoy more peace tomorrow,                                                                \
          for I don\'92t think you\'92d come a second time\
          to Odysseus\'92 home, son of Laertes.\'94\
          \
          That made the beggar Irus angry, so he said:\
          \'93Well, see how nicely this filthy beggar talks,\
          like an old woman from the baking ovens.\
          But I\'92ll make trouble for him. I\'92ll punch him\
          with both fists on the jaw, smash all his teeth\
          onto the ground, and treat him like a sow\
          who\'92s been devouring the crop. Come now,\
  [40] tighten your belt, so all these people here                                           \
          may recognize that we\'92re about to fight.\
          How can you go against a younger man?\'94\
          \
          So as their tempers heated up, they both grew angry\
          on the polished threshold by the lofty doors.\
          Strong and powerful Antinous observed them there,\
          and, laughing cheerfully, shouted to the suitors:\
          \'93My friends, here\'92s something we\'92ve not seen before.\
          Some god has sent this house such entertainment!\
          Irus and the stranger are quarreling\'97\
  [50] they\'92re going to fight each other with their fists.                                      \
          Let\'92s get them started right away!\'94\
          \
          Antinous\'92 words                                            \
          made them all jump up laughing. They gathered there,\
          around the shabby beggars. Then Eupeithes\'92 son,\
          Antinous, said to them:\
          \'93Listen to me,\
          you brave suitors. I\'92ve something to suggest.\
          We\'92ve got goats\'92 bellies lying by the fire,\
          stuffed full of fat and blood, our dinner meal.\
          Whichever of these two men wins this fight\
          and proves the better man, let him stand up\
  [60] and take the one he wishes for himself.                                                            \
          And he will always eat his meals with us.\
          Nor will we allow another beggar\
          to come into our group and ask for food.\'94\
          \
          Antinous finished. They were pleased with what he said.                                            \
          Then, resourceful Odysseus with his crafty mind\
          spoke to them:\
          \'93Friends, there\'92s no way an older man\
          weighed down with grief can fight a younger man.\
          But that trouble-making stomach of mine\
          urges me to do it, so he may beat me\
  [70] with his blows. But come now, let all of you                             \
          swear a binding oath that not one of you\
          supporting Irus will use his heavy fists\
          to strike at me unfairly, and by force\
          overpower me on Irus\'92 behalf.\'94\
          \
          Odysseus spoke. They all promised, as he\'92d asked.\
          After they had sworn and finished with the oath,\
          Telemachus spoke up with strength and confidence,                                                       \
          so all could hear:\
          \'93Stranger, if your proud spirit\
          and your heart urge you on to beat this man,\
  [80] don\'92t fear a single one of these Achaeans.                                                      \
          Whoever strikes at you will have to fight\
          with many more as well. I am your host,\
          and the two princes here agree with me,\
          Antinous and Eurymachus, both men\
          who understand things well.\'94\
          \
          Telemachus spoke,\
          and everyone endorsed his words. Then Odysseus,\
          while hitching up the rags around his private parts,\
          exposed his fine large thighs, and they could also see\
          his wide shoulders and his chest and powerful arms.\
  [90] Athena came up close beside that shepherd of his people                          \
          and enlarged his limbs. Each suitor, quite astonished,\
          would glance at the man beside him and then mutter\
          words like these:\
          \'93Irus will soon be in trouble,\
          something he brought on himself\'97he won\'92t be\
          Irus any more, judging from the thighs\
          that old man shows under those rags of his.\'94\
          \
          That\'92s how they talked. Irus\'92 heart was badly shaken.\
          But the servants girded up his clothes and led him up.\
          He was afraid\'97his flesh quivering on every limb\'97\
[100] but they forced him forward. Antinous sneered at him,                                \
          addressing him right to his face:\
          \'93You bragging fool,\
          if you\'92re afraid and tremble at this man,                                                                          \
          you should not exist or ever have been born.\
          He\'92s a old man worn down by misfortunes\
          that have overcome him. I\'92ll tell you this,\
          and what I say will happen\'97if this man\
          beats you and proves himself the better man,\
          I\'92ll throw you in a black ship, then take you\
          over to the mainland to king Echetus,\
[110] who tortures everyone.2  With pitiless bronze                          \
          he\'92ll cut off your nose and ears, then slice away\
          your cock and balls and throw them to the dogs,\
          raw meat for them rip to pieces.\'94\
          \
          Antinous spoke. An even greater trembling seized\
          the beggar\'92s legs, as they led him to the middle.\
          Both men raised their fists. At that point lord Odysseus,                                             \
          who had endured so much, was of two minds\'97Should he\
          hit Irus so his life would leave him where he fell,\
          or should he strike him a less punishing blow\
[120] and stretch him on the ground? As he thought about it,                               \
          this seemed the better choice\'97to hit him with less force,\
          so Achaeans wouldn\'92t look at him too closely.\
          Once their fists were up, Irus hit Odysseus\
          on his right shoulder, but Odysseus then struck him\
          on the neck, below his ear, and crushed the bones.\
          Immediately red blood came flowing from his mouth.\
          He fell down moaning in the dirt, grinding his teeth.\
          His feet kept kicking at the ground. The noble suitors\
          threw up their hands and almost died of laughter.                                                             \
[130] Odysseus grabbed Irus by the foot and dragged him                        \
          through the doorway until he reached the courtyard\
          and the portico gate. There he left him, leaning\
          against the courtyard wall with his stick in his hands.\
          Odysseus then addressed him\'97his words had wings:\
          \'93Sit there and scare away the pigs and dogs.\
          And do not, in your miserable state,\
          try to boss around strangers and beggars,\
          in case you end up in even worse distress.\'94\
          \
          As he spoke, he threw his tattered bag full of holes\
[140] across his shoulders, hanging by a twisted strap.                                                  \
          Then he went back into the doorway and sat down.\
          The suitors moved inside, laughing uproariously,                                                                \
          and threw him words of greeting as they went.\
          One of the arrogant young men said something like:\
          \'93May Zeus and the other eternal gods\
          give you, stranger, the thing you most desire,\
          what fills your heart\'97since you\'92ve now stopped\
          this greedy vagrant begging in this place.\
          We\'92ll soon take him over to the mainland,\
[150] to king Echetus, who mutilates all men.\'94                                                         \
          \
          That\'92s how they talked. Lord Odysseus was happy\
          at such welcome words. Then Antinous set down by him\
          the huge goat stomach stuffed with blood and fat,\
          and Amphinomus picked two loaves from the basket,                                                   \
          placed them before Odysseus, and then toasted him\
          with a golden cup, saying:\
          \'93Greetings, honoured stranger,\
          though right now you\'92ve got many miseries, \
          may happiness be yours in future days.\'94\
          \
          Then resourceful Odysseus answered him and said:\
[160] \'93Amphinomus, you seem to be a man                                      \
          with true intelligence. Your father, too,\
          had the same quality. I\'92ve heard about\
          his noble name\'97Nisus of Dulichium, \
          a brave and wealthy man. And people say\
          you come from him, and you do seem discreet.\
          So I\'92ll tell you something. You should note this\
          and listen. Of all the things that breathe\
          and move along the ground, Earth does not raise                                                  \
          anything more insignificant than man.\
[170] He thinks he\'92ll never suffer any harm                                       \
          in days to come, as long as gods provide\
          prosperity and his knees stay supple.\
          But when blessed gods bring on misfortunes,\
          he bears those, too, though much against his will.\
          The father of gods and men brings men the days\
          which shape the spirit of earth\'92s inhabitants.\
          Among men I was set to be successful, too,\
          but, yielding to my strength and power,\
          I did many reckless things. I trusted\
[180] my father and my family. So no man                                               \
          should ever practise any lawlessness.\
          He should hold his gifts from gods in silence,\
          whatever they give. I see suitors here\
          planning desperate acts, wasting the wealth\
          and dishonouring the wife of a man who,\
          I think, will not remain away for long,\
          not from his family and his native land.\
          He is close by. May some god lead you home,\
          and may you not have to confront the man\
[190] whenever he comes back to his own place.                                                   \
          For I don\'92t believe, once he comes here,\
          under his own roof, he and the suitors\
          will separate without some blood being spilled.\'94                                                     \
          \
          Odysseus spoke, and after pouring a libation,\
          drank some honey wine, then handed the cup back\
          to the leader of the people. Amphinomus\
          went through the house, head bowed, with foreboding \
          in his heart, for he had a sense of troubles\
          yet in store. Still, he did not escape his fate.\
[200] Athena had bound even him to be destroyed                                   \
          by a spear in the strong hand of Telemachus.\
          He sat back down on the chair from which he\'92d risen.\
          Then goddess Athena with the gleaming eyes\
          put an idea in the mind of wise Penelope,\
          Icarius\'92 daughter\'97to appear before the suitors,\
          so she might really get their hearts excited                                                                                 \
          and win more honour from her son and husband\
          than she\'92d had before.3 With an unnatural laugh\
          she spoke out and said:\
          \'93Eurynome, though my heart\
[210] was never keen before to show myself                                      \
          to these suitors, it is so now, disgraceful\
          though they are. And I\'92ve got words to say\
          to my own son\'97it would be better for him\
          not to mingle with those arrogant suitors.\
          They may say nice things, but they\'92re making plans\
          for nasty schemes in future.\'94\
          \
          Then her housekeeper,\
          Eurynome, answered her and said:\
          \'93Indeed, my child,                                  \
          all these things you say make sense. So you must go\
          and say that to your son. Do not hide it.\
[220] But first of all, you should wash your body                               \
          and put ointment on your face. Don\'92t leave here\
          showing both cheeks stained with tears like this.\
          It\'92s wrong to go on suffering grief for ever\
          and never stop. Your son is old enough\
          to grow a beard\'97and you prayed very hard\
          to gods that you would see him reach that age.\'94\
          \
          Then wise Penelope replied and said:\
          \'93Eurynome, although you care for me,\
          don\'92t tell me I should rinse my body off\
[230] or rub my skin with oil. Gods on Olympus                                       \
          have ravaged all my beauty, since the day\
          Odysseus went off in his hollow ships.\
          But tell Hippodameia and Autonoe\
          to come in here\'97they can stand beside me\
          in the hall. For I won\'92t go in there alone\
          among the men. I\'92d be ashamed.\'94\
          \
          Once Penelope said this,\
          the old woman went through the chamber to instruct\
          the women and urge them to appear. Then once again,\
          Athena, bright-eyed goddess, thought of something else.\
[240] She poured sweet sleep over Icarius\'92 daughter,                                                       \
          who leaned back and fell asleep. Lying on the couch,\
          all her limbs relaxed. Meanwhile, the lovely goddess                                                       \
          gave her immortal gifts, so those Achaean men\
          would be enchanted with her. First, with an ointment\
          made from ambrosia she cleaned her lovely face,\
          like the balm well-crowned Cytherea rubs on herself\
          when she goes to the joyful dancing of the Graces.4\
          She made her taller, too, and changed her figure,\
          so it looked more regal. Then she made her whiter\
[250] than fresh-cut ivory. After she\'92d done all this,                                                         \
          the lovely goddess left, and white-armed servants came,\
          chattering as they moved there from their chambers.\
          Sweet sleep then released Penelope. With her hands\
          she rubbed her cheeks and said:                                                                                                            \
          \'93In spite of heavy pain,\
          a deep sweet sleep has held me in its arms.\
          I wish pure Artemis would quickly bring\
          a gentle death to me right now, so I\
          no longer waste my life away, mourning\
          in my heart and craving my dear husband,\
[260] a man with every form of excellence,                                                                 \
          the finest of Achaeans.\'94\
          \
          Once she\'92d said this, \
          she moved down from her shining upper chambers.\
          She was not alone\'97two attendants went with her.\
          When the noble lady reached the suitors, she stood\
          beside a pillar holding up the well-made roof,\
          with a bright veil before her face. Loyal servants                                                                 \
          stood with her, one on either side. The suitors\
          in their hearts felt immediately overwhelmed\
          with sexual desire, and their legs grew weak. \
[270] Each of them prayed that he could go to bed with her.                                  \
          But she addressed her dear son Telemachus: \
          \'93Telemachus, your wit and understanding\
          are not as steady as they used to be.\
          While still a child, the way you used to think\
          was more astute. But now you\'92re fully grown,\
          on the verge of being a man, and anyone\
          from somewhere far away who looked at you\
          and only saw your beauty and your size\
          might well observe that you\'92re a rich man\'92s son.\
[280] Yet your mind and thoughts are no longer wise.                                             \
          What sort of actions are going on in here,\
          in this house, when you allow a stranger\
          to be mistreated in this way? And now,\
          what if this stranger, sitting in our home,\
          should suffer harm from such severe abuse?\
          You\'92d be disgraced among all men and shamed.\'94\
          \
          Shrewd Telemachus then answered her and said:\
          \'93Mother, I don\'92t take issue with you now\
          for being angry. I know about these things.\
[290] My heart understands them, all the details,                                                  \
          good and bad. I was still a child before.\
          But I can\'92t think through everything correctly,                                                          \
          with these men sitting round me on all sides\'97\
          they strike at me and hatch their wicked plans.\
          And I\'92ve no one here to guard me. But still, \
          this battle between Irus and the stranger \
          did not turn out the way the suitors wished.\
          The stranger\'92s strength made him the better man.\
          By Father Zeus, Athena, and Apollo,\
[300] I wish these suitors now inside our home                                  \
          could be overpowered, just as Irus was,\
          their heads drooping down inside the courtyard\
          and inside the hall, with each man\'92s limbs \
          gone limp\'97that\'92s how Irus is now sitting\
          beside the courtyard gate, nodding his head,                                                               \
          like some drunken fool. He can\'92t stand upright\
          or wander home, wherever his home is,\
          because his precious limbs have all gone slack.\'94\
          \
          As they were talking to each other in this way,\
[310] Eurymachus spoke to Penelope and said:                                                                    \
          \'93Daughter of Icarius, wise Penelope,\
          if all the Argives in Iasian Argos\
          could see you, more suitors would be feasting\
          in your home from tomorrow on, since you\
          excel all women for your form, your stature,\
          and for the wisdom you have in your heart.\'945\
          \
          Wise Penelope then answered him:                                                                                                   \
          \'93Eurymachus,\
          what\'92s excellent about my form and beauty\
          the gods destroyed when Argives left for Troy\
[320] and Odysseus, my husband, went with them.                                             \
          If he would come and organize my life,\
          then I\'92d be more beautiful and famous.\
          But now I\'92m grieving. A god has sent me\
          so much trouble!  You know, when he went off\
          and left his native land, he held the wrist \
          on my right hand and said:\
          \
          \'91Wife,\
          I don\'92t believe all well-armed Achaeans\
          will make it safely back from Troy unharmed.                                             \
          For Trojans, people say, are fighting men,\
[330] who can hurl their spears and draw their arrows               \
          and control swift-footed horses, those things\
          which soon decide the outcome of the fight\
          in an impartial war. So I don\'92t know\
          if god will get me back or I\'92ll be killed\
          over there in Troy. So you must care for\
          everything back here. When I\'92m away,\
          think of father and mother in the home, \
          the way you do right now, but even more.\
          But when you see our son has grown a beard,\
[340] then marry who you wish, and leave the house.\'92                                 \
          \
          \'93That\'92s what he said. Now it\'92s all happening.\
          The night will come when some hateful marriage\
          will be my lot, now that I\'92ve been cursed,\
          for Zeus has taken away my happiness,\
          and painful grief has come into my heart,\
          into my spirit. The way you men behave\
          was not appropriate for suitors in the past.\
          Those who wish to court a noble lady,\
          daughter of a wealthy man, and compete\
[350] against each other, bring in their cattle,                                                           \
          their own rich flocks, to feast the lady\'92s friends.\
          They give splendid presents and don\'92t consume\
          another\'92s livelihood and pay him nothing.\'94                                                                  \
          \
          Penelope finished. Long-suffering lord Odysseus\
          was pleased that she was getting them to give her gifts,\
          charming them with soothing words, her mind on other things.\
          Then Antinous, Eupeithes\'92 son, spoke to her:\
          \'93Daughter of Icarius, wise Penelope, \
          if one of the Achaeans wants to bring\
[360] a gift in here, you should accept it.                                                                        \
          It\'92s not good if you refuse a present.\
          But we\'92ll not be going back to our estates\
          or any other place, until you marry\
          whoever is the best of the Achaeans.\'94\
          \
          Antinous spoke. His comments pleased the suitors.                                                          \
          Each man sent a herald out to fetch some gifts.\
          One of them brought back, at Antinous\'92 request,\
          a large and lovely robe with rich embroidery.\
          It had golden brooches on it, twelve in all, \
[370] fitted with graceful curving clasps. Another man                              \
          brought in a chain made of gold for Eurymachus,\
          a finely crafted work strung with amber beads,\
          bright as the sun. Two attendants carried back\
          some earrings for Eurydamas, with three droplets\
          in a stylish shining cluster. For lord Peisander,\
          Polyctor\'92s son, an attendant brought a necklace,                                                                 \
          a splendid piece of jewelry. All Achaeans\
          presented her with some gorgeous gift or other.\
          Noble Penelope then left and went upstairs.\
[380] Her servants carried up the lovely gifts for her.                                                     \
          Then the suitors turned to joyful songs and dances,\
          enjoying themselves, waiting for evening to arrive.\
          And as they entertained themselves, black evening came.\
          They then set up three braziers in the hall for light.\
          They put dry kindling round them, hard seasoned wood,\
          freshly split by axe. They set torches in between,                                                                \
          and brave Odysseus\'92 servants held up the blazing flames.\
          Then Odysseus, born from Zeus, man of many schemes,\
          addressed those slaves in person, saying:\
          \'93Servants of Odysseus,\
[390] your master, who\'92s been gone away so long,                                               \
          go to the rooms the honoured queen lives in,\
          and twist the yarn beside her. Sit down there,\
          and make her happy, by staying in the room\
          or combing wool by hand. As for these lamps,\
          I\'92ll keep providing light for all these men.\
          Even if they wish to stay for fair-throned Dawn,\
          they cannot not wear me down, for I\'92m a man\
          who can endure much suffering.\'94\
          \
          Odysseus spoke.                             \
          The servants looked at one another and burst out laughing.\
[400] Then fair-cheeked Melantho chastised him shamefully,                               \
          a child of Dolius, but Penelope had raised her, \
          treating her as her own daughter, providing toys,\
          whatever she desired. And yet, in spite of this,\
          her heart was never sorry for Penelope,\
          for she loved Eurymachus and had sex with him.\
          Now in abusive language she rebuked Odysseus:\
          \'93You idiotic stranger, you\'92re a man\
          whose mind has had all sense knocked out of it.\
          You\'92ve no wish to go into the blacksmith\'92s home\
[410] or a public house somewhere to get some sleep.                                      \
          No. You\'92re here, and you babble all the time.\
          Around these many men, you\'92re far too brash.                                                         \
          There\'92s no fear in your heart. In fact, it\'92s wine           \
          that\'92s seized your wits, or else your mind\
          has always been that way and forces you\
          to prattle uselessly. Are you playing the fool\
          because you overcame that beggar Irus?\
          Take care another man, better than him,\
          doesn\'92t quickly come to stand against you.\
[420] His heavy fists will punch you in the head,                                                    \
          stain you with lots of blood, and shove you out,\
          send you packing from this house.\'94\
          \
          With an angry frown,\
          wily Odysseus then answered her and said:\
          \'93You bitch!  Now I\'92ll go and tell Telemachus\
          the way you talk, so he can cut you up,\
          limb from limb, right here.\'94\
          \
          Once Odysseus spoke,                                              \
          his words alarmed the women, and they scattered,\
          moving off and fleeing through the hall. Each of them\
          felt her limbs grow slack with fear\'97they all believed\
[430] he was telling them the truth. Then Odysseus stood                        \
          beside the flaming braziers, keeping them alight.\
          He looked at all the men. But in his chest his heart\
          was making other plans, which he would act upon.\
          There was no way Athena would allow the suitors,\
          those arrogant men, to stop behaving badly,\
          so that still more pain would sink into the heart\
          of Laertes\'92 son, Odysseus. So Eurymachus,\
          son of Polybus, began to shout to them,\
          insulting Odysseus, to make his comrades laugh.                                                                \
[440] \'93Listen to me, those of you who\'92re courting                              \
          the splendid queen, so I may speak to you\
          of what the heart inside my chest is urging.\
          The gods were not unwilling this man came\
          into Odysseus\'92 home. In fact, I think\
          the torch light emanates from his own head\
          because he\'92s got no hair up there at all.\'946\
          \
          Once he\'92d said this, he then spoke to Odysseus, \
          destroyer of cities:\
          \'93Stranger, how\'92d you like to work?\
          What if I hired you for some distant farm\'97\
[450] I guarantee I\'92d pay you\'97gathering stones                                \
          to build up walls and planting lofty trees?\
          I\'92d bring some food there for you all year round,                                                   \
          clothe you, and get some sandals for your feet.\
          But since you\'92ve only learned to misbehave,\
          you won\'92t want to acquaint yourself with work.\
          No. You\'92d prefer to beg throughout the land,\
          collecting food for your voracious gut.\'94\
          \
          Resourceful Odysseus then answered him and said:\
          \'93Eurymachus, I wish the two of us \
[460] could have a contest working in the spring,                                                  \
          when long days come, both mowing down the grass.\
          I\'92d have a curved scythe in my hands, and you\
          with one just like it. Then we\'92d test ourselves,\
          in lush grass, with no food to eat till dusk.                                                                     \
          If we had oxen there, the best there are,\
          huge tawny beasts, both well fed on grass,\
          with strength that never tires, and in a field\
          measuring four acres and containing soil \
          which turns under the plough, then you\'92d see\
[470] if I could cut a straight unbroken furrow.                                                        \
          If this very day Cronos\'92 son stirred up\
          a battle somewhere and I had a shield,\
          two spears, and a helmet all of bronze,\
          well fitted to my temples, then you\'92d see\
          how I\'92d join in with fighters in the front.\
          And you\'92d not chatter on, insulting me                                                                             \
          about my stomach. But you\'92re much too proud,\
          and your mind\'92s unfeeling. You really think\
          you\'92re an important man, with real power,\
[480] because you mingle with a few weak men.                                                    \
          But if Odysseus returned, got back here\
          to his native land, those doors over there,\
          although they\'92re really wide, would quickly seem\
          too narrow for you as you fled outside.\'94\
          \
          Odysseus finished. Eurymachus in his heart\
          grew even angrier, and, with scowl, he spoke\'97\
          his words had wings:\
          \'93You miserable man,\
          I\'92ll bring you trouble soon enough. You talk\
          brashly in this way among so many men,                                                                       \
[490] no fear in your heart!  Wine has seized your wits,                                 \
          or else your mind has always been like this,\
          and prattles vainly on. Have you gone mad\
          because you beat that beggar Irus?\'94\
          \
          As he said this, he picked up a stool. But Odysseus\
          sat down beside the knee of Amphinomus\
          from Dulichium, in fear of Eurymachus.\
          So Eurymachus struck a person serving wine\
          on his right hand. The wine jug fell and hit the ground\
          with a resounding clang, and the server groaned,\
[500] then toppled backwards in the dirt. The suitors                                \
          broke into an uproar in the shadowy halls,\
          and one man, glancing at the person next to him,                                                             \
          said something like these words:\
          \'93How I wish\
          that wandering stranger there had perished\
          somewhere else before he reached this place.\
          He\'92d not be making such a fuss among us.\
          Now we\'92re brawling over beggars. This meal,\
          the splendid feast, will bring us no delight,\
          now that this trouble\'92s got the upper hand.\'94\
          \
[510] Telemachus then spoke to them with royal authority:                                    \
          \'93You fools, you\'92ve gone insane, and in your hearts\
          no longer hide how much you eat and drink.\
          You must be being incited by some god.\
          So, now you\'92ve feasted well, return back home.\
          When the spirit bids, you can get some rest.\
          Still, I\'92m not chasing anyone away.\'94\
          \
          Telemachus spoke, and they all bit their lips,                                                                          \
          astonished that he\'92d spoken out so boldly.\
          Then Amphinomus, splendid son of Nisus,\
[520] son of lord Aretias, spoke to them and said:                                                             \
          \'93My friends, when a man says something just,\
          no one should get enraged and answer him\
          with hostile words. Don\'92t abuse this stranger\
          or any slaves in lord Odysseus\'92 home.\
          But come, let the wine server pour some drops\
          into our cups so we can make libations,\
          and then go home and rest. This stranger here,                                                      \
          we\'92ll leave him in Odysseus\'92 palace,\
          and Telemachus can cater to him\'97\
[530] after all, it\'92s his home which he came to.\'94                                                       \
          \
          Amphinomus finished. They were all delighted\
          with what he\'92d said. A herald from Dulichium, \
          lord Mulius, attending on Amphinomus,\
          mixed wine in a bowl for them and served it round,\
          coming to each man in his turn. They poured libations\
          to the sacred gods and drank wine sweet as honey.\
          Once they\'92d poured libations and had drinks of wine\
          to their heart\'92s content, they all went on their way,\
          each man going to his own house to get some rest.}