{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf460
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural\qc

\f0\fs24 \cf0 BOOK NINETEEN\
Eurycleia Recognizes Odysseus\
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural
\cf0 [Odysseus and Telemachus hide the weapons; Telemachus leaves to go to bed; Penelope comes down; Melantho insults Odysseus a second time; Penelope upbraids her, then has a conversation with Odysseus; Penelope tells him of her deception of the suitors; Odysseus gives her a long false story of his Cretan ancestry and talks of meeting Odysseus; Penelope questions him about Odysseus\'92 clothes and comrades; Penelope orders Eurycleia to wash Odysseus\'92 feet; the story of the scar on Odysseus\'92 knee, how Odysseus got his name; the hunting expedition with Autolycus; Eurycleia recognizes the scar; Odysseus threatens her; Penelope and Odysseus resume their conversation; Penelope tells about her dream; Odysseus comments on the interpretation of the dream; Penelope talks about the two gates of dreams, then proposes the contest of firing an arrow through twelve axe heads; Odysseus urges her to have the contest; Penelope goes upstairs to sleep.]\
\
          So lord Odysseus remained in the hall behind,\
          thinking of ways he might kill off the suitors,\
          with Athena\'92s help. He spoke out immediately\
          to Telemachus\'97his words had wings:\
          \'93Telemachus,\
          all these war weapons we must stash inside,\
          and when the suitors notice they\'92re not there\
          and question you, then reassure them,\
          using gentle language:\
          \
          \'91I\'92ve put them away\
           in a place far from the smoke. Those weapons\
  [10] are no longer like the ones Odysseus left                          \
          when he set off for Troy so long ago.\
          They\'92re tarnished. That\'92s how much the fire\'92s breath\
          has reached them. Moreover, a god has set                                                    \
          greater fear inside my heart\'97you may drink\
          too much wine and then fight amongst yourselves\
          and wound each other. That would shame the feast,\
          disgrace your courtship. For iron by itself\
          can draw a man to use it.\'92\'93\
          \
          Odysseus finished.\
          His dear father\'92s words convinced Telemachus.\
  [20] He called his nurse, Eurycleia, and said to her:                                                      \
          \'93Nurse, come and help me. Keep the women\
          in their rooms, so I can put away in storage\
          these fine weapons belonging to my father.\
          Since the time he left, when I was still a child,\
          no one\'92s looked after them, and smoky fires\
          have tarnished them. Now I want to keep them\
          beyond the reach of breathing fire.\'94                                                        \
          \
          His dear nurse, Eurycleia, then said to him:\
          \'93Yes, my child, may you always think about\
  [30] caring for this house, guarding all its wealth.                                               \
          But come, who will go off and fetch a light\
          and carry it for you, if you won\'92t let\
          the servant women, who could hold torches,\
          walk out in front of you?\'94\
          \
          Shrewd Telemachus\
          then answered her and said:\
          \'93This stranger will.\
          I won\'92t let anyone who\'92s touched my food\
          rest idle, not even if he\'92s come here\
          from somewhere far away.\'94\
          \
          Telemachus spoke.\
          She did not reply\'97her words could find no wings.\
  [40] So she locked shut the doors in that stately room.                                                       \
          Then both Odysseus and his splendid son jumped up\
          and carried away the helmets, embossed shields,\
          and pointed spears. In front of them Pallas Athena\
          held up a golden lamp and cast a lovely light.\
          Then suddenly Telemachus spoke to his father:\
          \'93Father, what my eyes are witnessing\
          is an enormous wonder. In this room\
          the walls and beautiful pedestals,\
          the fir beams and high supporting pillars\
  [50] are glowing in my eyes, as if lit up                                            \
          by blazing fire. Some god must be inside,\
          one of those who hold wide heaven.\'94                                                                                  \
          \
          Resourceful Odysseus\
          then answered him and said:\
          \'93Keep quiet.\
          Check those ideas and ask no questions.\
          This is how gods who hold Olympus work.\
          You should go and get some rest. I\'92ll stay here,\
          so I can agitate the servants even more\'97\
          and your mother. As she laments, she\'92ll ask\
          for each and every detail.\'94\
          \
          Odysseus finished. \
  [60] Telemachus moved off, going through the hall,                                                     \
          below the flaming torches, out into the room\
          where he used to rest when sweet sleep came to him.\
          Then he lay down there and waited for the dawn.                                                              \
          Lord Odysseus remained behind, in the hall,\
          thinking how to kill the suitors with Athena\'92s help. \
          Then wise Penelope emerged out of her room,\
          looking like Artemis or golden Aphrodite.\
          Beside the fire where she used to sit, they placed\
          a chair for her, inlaid with ivory and silver.\
  [70] Imalcius, a craftsman, had made it years ago.                                                         \
          He\'92d fixed a footstool underneath, part of the chair,\
          on which they usually threw a large sheep fleece.\
          Here wise Penelope sat, while white-armed servants                                                       \
          came from the women\'92s hall and started to remove\
          the lavish amounts of food, the tables, and the cups\
          high-spirited suitors had been drinking from.\
          The embers in the braziers they threw on the floor,\
          then filled them up with plenty of fresh wood\
          for warmth and light. But then Melantho once again\
  [80] went at Odysseus, chiding him a second time:                                                       \
          \'93Stranger, are you still going to pester us\
          even now, all through the night in here,\
          roaming around the house, spying on women?\
          Get outside, you wretch, and be satisfied\
          with what you\'92ve had to eat, or soon enough\
          you\'92ll be beaten with a torch and leave that way.\'94\
          \
          Resourceful Odysseus scowled and said to her:                                                                      \
          \'93You\'92re a passionate woman\'97why is it\
          you go at me like this, with such anger\
  [90] in your heart? Is it because I\'92m filthy,                                                                 \
          wear shabby clothing on my body,\
          and beg throughout the district? I have to\'97\
          sheer need forces that on me. That\'92s what\
          beggars and vagabonds are like. But once\
          I was wealthy and lived in my own home,\
          in a rich house, too, among my people.\
          I often gave gifts to a wanderer like me,\
          no matter who he was or what his needs\
          when he arrived. I had countless servants\
[100] and many other things that people have                                   \
          when they live well and are considered rich.\
          But then Zeus, son of Cronos, ruined me.                                                                      \
          That\'92s what he wanted, I suppose. And so,\
          woman, take care that you, too, someday\
          don\'92t lose all that grace which now makes you\
          stand out among the woman servants here.\
          Your mistress may lose her temper with you\
          and make things difficult, or Odysseus\
          may come home, for there\'92s still a shred of hope.\
[110] Even if he\'92s dead and won\'92t come home again,                                         \
          thanks to Apollo he\'92s got Telemachus,\
          a son just like himself. And no woman\
          in these halls who acts with recklessness\
          escapes his notice. He\'92s a child no longer.\'94\
          \
          Odysseus spoke. Wise Penelope heard his words\
          and rebuked Melantho, saying to her:\
          \'93You can be sure,\
          you bold and reckless bitch, I\'92ve noticed\
          your gross acts. And you\'92ll wipe away the stain\
          with your own head. You clearly know full well,\
[120] because you heard me say it\'97I\'92m intending                            \
          to ask this stranger in my halls some questions\
          about my husband, since I\'92m in so much pain.\'94\
          \
          Penelope paused, then spoke to Eurynome,\
          her housekeeper, and said:\
          \'93Eurynome,\
          bring a chair over here with a fleece on it,\
          so the stranger can sit down and talk to me\
          and hear me out. I want to question him.\'94\
          \
          Once Penelope had spoken, Eurynome                                                                                         \
          quickly brought a polished chair and placed it there.\
[130] She threw a sheep fleece over it. Lord Odysseus,                              \
          who\'92d been through so much, sat down on it. And then\
          wise Penelope began their conversation:\
          \'93Stranger, first of all I\'92ll ask this question\'97\
          Who are you among men? Where are you from?\
          From what city? And where are your parents?\'94\
          \
          Resourceful Odysseus then answered her and said:\
          \'93Lady, no human living on boundless earth\
          could find fault with you. And your fame extends\
          right up to spacious heaven, as it does\
[140] for an excellent king who fears the gods                                   \
          and governs many courageous people,                                                                              \
          upholding justice. His black earth is rich\
          in barley and in wheat, and his orchards\
          are laden down with fruit. His flocks bear young\
          and never fail, while the sea yields up its fish.\
          All this from his fine leadership. With him\
          his people thrive. So here inside your home\
          ask me questions about anything except\
          my family or my native land, in case\
[150] you fill my heart with still more sorrow,                                                           \
          as I remember them. For I\'92m a man\
          who\'92s suffered a great deal, and there\'92s no need\
          for me to sit here weeping my laments\
          in someone else\'92s house\'97for it\'92s not good                                                                    \
          to be sad all the time and never stop,\
          in case the slaves or you yourself resent it\
          and say I swim in tears because my mind\
          is now besotted, loaded down with wine.\'94\
          \
          Wise Penelope then answered him and said:\
[160] \'93Stranger, the immortal gods destroyed                                    \
          my excellence in form and body\
          when Argives got on board their ships for Troy.\
          Odysseus went with them, my husband.\
          If he would come and organize my life,\
          my reputation then would be more famous,\
          more beautiful, as well. But now I grieve.\
          Some god has laid so many troubles on me.\
          For all the finest men who rule the islands\'97                                                              \
          Dulichium, Same, wooded Zacynthus\'97\
[170] and those who live in sunny Ithaca,                                                                      \
          these men are courting me against my will.\
          And they are ruining the house. That\'92s why\
          I have no time for suppliants and strangers,\
          or for heralds who do the people\'92s work.1\
          Instead I waste away my heart, longing\
          for Odysseus. They\'92re all keen on marriage,\
          but I trick them with my weaving. Some god\
          first breathed into my heart the thought\
          that I should place a huge loom in the halls\
[180] and weave a robe, wide and delicate fabric.                                                         \
          So I spoke to them at once:\
          \
          \'91You young men,\
          my suitors, since lord Odysseus is dead,\
          you\'92re keen for me to marry, but you must wait\
          until I\'92m finished with this robe, so I\
          don\'92t waste this woven yarn in useless work.\
          It\'92s a burial shroud for lord Laertes,\
          for when the lethal fate of his sad death\
          will seize him, so no Achaean woman\
          in the district will get angry with me\
[190] that a man who\'92d won much property                              \
          should have to lie without a death shroud.\'92\
          \
          That\'92s what I said, and their proud hearts agreed.\
          So every day I\'92d weave at the big loom.\
          But at night, once the torches were set up,                                                                    \
          I\'92d unravel it. And so for three years\
          I tricked Achaeans into believing me.\
          But as the seasons came and months rolled on,\
          and many days passed by, the fourth year came.\
          That\'92s when they came and caught me undoing yarn\'97\
[200] thanks to my slaves, those ungrateful bitches.                                            \
          They all shouted speeches at me. And so,\
          against my will, I was forced to finish off\
          that piece of weaving. Now I can\'92t escape\
          the marriage or invent some other scheme.\
          My parents are really urging me to marry,\
          and my son is worrying about those men\
          eating away his livelihood. He notices,                                                                              \
          because he\'92s now a man, quite capable \
          of caring for a household to which Zeus\
[210] has granted fame. But tell me of your race,                                                  \
          where you come from. For you did not spring up\
          out of an oak tree in some ancient story\
          or from a stone.\'94\
          \
          Odysseus, a man of many schemes,\
          then answered her and said: \
          \'93Noble lady,\
          wife of Odysseus, Laertes\'92 son,\
          will you never stop asking your questions\
          about my family? All right, I\'92ll tell you.\
          But you\'92ll be giving me more sorrows\
          than those which grip me here\'97as is the rule\
[220] when a man\'92s been absent from his native land                       \
          as long as I have now, wandering around,                                                                     \
          through many towns of mortal men, suffering\
          great distress. Still, I\'92ll answer what you ask,\
          the questions you have posed. There\'92s a place\
          in the middle of the wine-dark sea called Crete,\
          a lovely, fruitful land surrounded by the sea.\
          Many men live there, more than one can count,\
          in ninety cities. The dialects they speak\
          are all mixed up. There are Achaeans \
[230] and stout-hearted native Cretans, too,                                                               \
          Cydonians and three groups of Dorians,\
          and noble Pelasgians. Their cities\
          include great Cnossos, where king Minos reigned,\
          after he\'92d talked with Zeus for nine full years, \
          the father of my father, brave Deucalion.                                                                       \
          Deucalion had me and king Idomeneus.\
          But Idomeneus went away to Troy\
          in his beaked ships with Atreus\'92 sons.\
          My name\'92s well known\'97Aethon\'97the younger son,\
[240] but Idomeneus was older by birth                                             \
          and was the finer man. I saw Odysseus there\
          and gave him welcoming gifts. The wind\'92s force\
          brought him to Crete, as he was sailing on,\
          bound for Troy\'97it drove him off his course\
          past Malea. He\'92d moored at Amnisus,\
          where one finds the cave of Eilithyia,\
          in a difficult harbour, fleeing the storm,\
          but only just. He went immediately                                                                                      \
          up to the city, seeking Idomeneus,\
[250] saying he was his loved and honoured friend.                                            \
          But by now nine or ten days had gone by\
          since Idomeneus had set off for Troy\
          in his beaked ships. So I invited him\
          into my house and entertained him well,\
          with a kind welcome, using the rich store\
          of goods inside my house. For the others,\
          comrades who followed him, I gathered up\
          and gave out barley from the public stores,\
          gleaming wine, and cattle for sacrifice,\
[260] enough to satisfy their hearts. And there                                  \
          those Achaean lords remained twelve days.\
          The great North Wind held them there, penned them in\'97                         \
          he would not let them stand up on the earth.\
          Some angry deity had stirred him up.\
          But on the thirteenth day, the wind eased off,\
          and they put out to sea.\'94\
          \
          As Odysseus spoke,\
          he made the many falsehood seem like truth.\
          Penelope listened with tears flowing down.\
          Her flesh melted\'97just as on high mountains\
[270] snow melts away under West Wind\'92s thaw,                                                               \
          once East Wind blows it down, and, as it melts,\
          the flowing rivers fill\'97that\'92s how her fair cheeks\
          melted then, as she shed tears for her husband,\
          who was sitting there beside her.2  Odysseus\
          felt pity in his heart for his grieving wife,                                                                                     \
          but his eyes stayed firm between his eyelids,\
          like horn or iron, and he kept up his deceit\
          to conceal his tears. But then, when Penelope\
          had had enough of crying and mourning,\
          she spoke to him once more and said:                                                \
[280] \'93Now, stranger,                                                                \
          I think I\'92d really like to test you out,\
          to see if you did, in fact, entertain\
          my husband and his fine companions there,\
          in your halls, as you just claimed. So tell me\
          what sort of clothes he had on his body\
          and the kind of man he was. And tell me\
          about his comrades who went there with him.\'94\
          \
          Resourceful Odysseus then answered her and said:                                                           \
          \'93Lady, it\'92s difficult to tell you this\
[290] for any man who\'92s been away so long\'97                                   \
          it\'92s now the twentieth year since he went off\
          and left my country. But I\'92ll describe for you\
          how my heart pictures him. Lord Odysseus\
          wore a woolen purple cloak, a double one.\
          The brooch on it was made of gold\'97it had\
          a pair of clasps and a fine engraving\
          on the front, a dog held in its forepaws\
          a dappled fawn, gripping it as it writhed.\
          Everyone who saw it was astonished\
[300] at those gold animals\'97the dog held down                                       \
          the fawn, as he throttled it, and the fawn\
          was struggling with its feet, trying to flee.\
          I noticed the tunic on his body\'97\
          glistening like the skin of a dry onion\'97\
          it was so soft and shone out like the sun.\
          In fact, many women kept watching him\
          in wonder. And I\'92ll tell you something else.\
          Keep in mind I don\'92t know if Odysseus\
          dressed his body in these clothes at home,\
[310] or if some comrade gave them to him                                      \
          on his swift ship after he went aboard,\
          or perhaps a stranger did\'97Odysseus\
          was liked by many men. Few Achaeans                                                                            \
          could equal him. I gave him gifts myself,\
          a bronze sword, a lovely purple cloak,\
          with a double fold, and a fringed tunic,\
          and I sent him off on his well-benched ship\
          with every honour. And in his company\
          he had a herald, older than himself,\
[320] but not by much. I\'92ll tell you about him.                                                          \
          He looked like this\'97he had rounded shoulders,\
          a dark skin, and curly hair. And his name\
          was Eurybates. Odysseus valued him\
          more than any other of his comrades\'97\
          he had a mind that matched his own.\'94\
          \
          As Odysseus spoke, in Penelope he roused\
          desire to weep still more, because she recognized\
          in what Odysseus said signs that he spoke the truth.                                                        \
          But then, when she\'92d had enough of tearful sorrow,\
          she answered him and said these words:\
[330] \'93Stranger,                                            \
          though I pitied you before, in my home\
          you\'92ll now find genuine welcome and respect.\
          I was the one who gave him that clothing\
          you talk about. I brought it from the room,\
          folded it, and pinned on the shining brooch\
          to be an ornament for him. But now,\
          I\'92ll not be welcoming him here again,\
          when he returns to his dear native land.\
          Odysseus set off with an evil fate\
[340] to catch a glimpse of wicked Ilion,                                                                         \
          a place that never should be spoken of.\'94                                                                          \
          \
          Resourceful Odysseus then answered her and said: \
          \'93Noble wife of Odysseus, Laertes\'92 son,\
          don\'92t mar your lovely skin or waste your heart\
          by weeping for your husband any more.\
          I don\'92t blame you in the least, for anyone\
          would mourn the husband she had married\
          and then lost, one she\'92d had loving sex with\
          and to whom she borne a child, even if\
[350] he were not Odysseus, who, people say                                    \
          is like the gods. But end your crying,\
          and listen to my words. I\'92ll tell you the truth,\
          hiding nothing\'97for I\'92ve already heard                                                                              \
          about Odysseus\'92 return. He\'92s close by,\
          in the wealthy land of Thesprotians,\
          still alive and bringing much fine treasure\
          with him. He\'92s urging men to give him gifts\
          throughout that land. He lost his loyal friends\
          on the wine-dark sea and his hollow ship,\
[360] as he was moving from the island Thrinacia.                                               \
          Zeus and Helios were angry with him\'97\
          his crew had slaughtered Helios\'92 cattle.\
          So they all perished in the surging sea.\
          But Odysseus, holding onto the ship\'92s keel,\
          was tossed by waves on shore, in the land\
          of the Phaeacians, who by their descent\
          are close relations of the gods. These men\
          honoured him with all their hearts, just as if                                                                \
          he were a god. They gave him many gifts\
[370] and were keen to bring him home unharmed.                                          \
          Odysseus would have been here long ago, \
          but to his heart it seemed a better thing\
          to visit many lands collecting wealth.\
          For above all mortal men, Odysseus\
          knows ways to win many advantages.\
          No other man can rival him in this.\
          That\'92s what Pheidon, the Thesprotian king,\
          told me, and he swore to me in person,\
          as he poured libations in his home, \
[380] the ship was launched and comrades were prepared                \
          to take him back to his dear native land.                                                                         \
          But before they left he sent me away.\
          It happened that a Thesprotian ship\
          was sailing for wheat-rich Dulichium.\
          He showed me all the rich possessions\
          Odysseus had collected. There was enough\
          to feed his family for ten generations\'97\
          that\'92s how much was lying in storage there\
          in that king\'92s house. Odysseus, he said,\
[390] had gone to Dodona to find out there,                                                              \
          from the towering oak, what plans Zeus had\
          for the voyage back to his dear native land,\
          after being away so long.3 Should he come\
          openly or in secret? He\'92s near by and safe                                                                     \
          and will be here soon. He won\'92t stay away\
          from his friends and native land much longer.\
          I\'92ll make an oath on that for you. May Zeus\
          be my first witness, highest and best of gods,\
          and the hearth of excellent Odysseus,\
[400] which I\'92ve reached, all these things will happen                        \
          just as I describe. In this very month\
          Odysseus will come, as the old moon wanes\
          and the new moon starts to rise.\'94\
          \
          Wise Penelope\
          then answered him and said:\
          \'93O stranger,\
          I wish what you have said might come about.\
          You\'92d soon come to recognize my friendship,                                                            \
          so many gifts from me that any man\
          who met you would call you truly blessed.\
          But my heart has a sense of what will be\'97\
[410] Odysseus won\'92t be coming home again,                                                           \
          and you\'92ll not find a convoy out of here,\
          because there are no leaders in this house,\
          not the quality of man Odysseus was,\
          if there was ever such a man, to welcome\
          honoured strangers and send them on their way.\
          But, you servant women, wash this stranger,\
          and prepare a place to sleep\'97a bed, cloaks,\
          bright coverlets\'97so in warmth and comfort\
          he may reach Dawn with her golden throne. \
[420] Tomorrow morning early give him a bath                                        \
          and rub him down with oil, so he\'92ll be ready\
          to take his seat inside the hall and eat his meal\
          beside Telemachus. Things will go badly\
          for any one of them who injures him\
          and pains his heart\'97that man will accomplish\
          nothing further here, even though his rage\
          is truly fierce. How will you learn from me,\
          stranger, that I in any way excel\
          among all women for my prudent plans\
[430] and my intelligence, if you dine here,                                                                \
          in my halls, dressed in filthy ragged clothes?\
          Men don\'92t live long. And if a man is harsh\
          and thinks unfeelingly, then everyone\
          lays painful curses on his future life,                                                                                    \
          and when he\'92s dead they all make fun of him.\
          But if a man is innocent and thinks\
          with no sense of injury, then strangers \
          bear his fame far and wide among all men,\
          and many say of him \'91He\'92s a true man.\'92\'93\
          \
[440] Resourceful Odysseus then answered her and said:                                           \
          \'93Honoured wife of Odysseus, Laertes\'92 son,\
          I\'92ve hated cloaks and shining coverlets \
          since I first left the mountain snows of Crete,\
          when I departed on my long-oared ship.\
          So I\'92ll lie down, as I\'92ve been doing before                                                                       \
          through sleepless nights. I\'92ve lain many nights\
          on foul bedding, awaiting bright-throned Dawn.\
          And having my feet washed brings no delight\
          into my heart. No woman in your household\
[450] will touch my feet, none of the serving women                        \
          in your home, unless there is an old one,\
          who knows true devotion and has suffered\
          in her heart as many pains as I have.\
          I\'92d not resent it if she touched my feet.\'94\
          \
          Wise Penelope then answered him and said: \
          \'93Dear stranger, no guest from distant lands                                                                 \
          who\'92s come into my house has ever been\
          as wise as you or more welcome\'97your words\
          are all so sensible and thoughtful. I do have\
[460] an old woman with an understanding heart.                                               \
          She gave my helpless husband her fine care\
          the day his mother first gave birth to him.\
          Although she\'92s weak and old, she\'92ll wash your feet.\
          So come now, stand up, wise Eurycleia,\
          and bathe a man the same age as your master.\
          Perhaps Odysseus has feet and hands like his,\
          for mortal men soon age when times are bad.\'94                                                        \
          \
          Penelope spoke, and the old woman held her hands\
          over her face and shed warm tears. She spoke out\
          uttering words of sorrow:\
[470] \'93Alas for you, my child.                            \
          There\'92s nothing I can do. Zeus must despise you\
          above all people, though you have a heart\
          that fears the gods. No mortal up to now\
          has given Zeus, who hurls the thunderbolt,\
          so many rich burned pieces of the thigh,\
          or offered such well-chosen sacrifice\
          as you\'92ve made to him, praying you might reach\
          a sleek old age and raise your splendid son.\
          But now from you alone he\'92s taken away\
[480] the day that you\'92ll return. And it may be                                         \
          that women in some strange and far-off land\
          make fun of him, as well, when he arrives\
          at some famous home, the way these bitches,\
          mock you here, all of them. To stop their slurs,\
          their insults, you won\'92t let them wash your feet.\
          But Icarius\'92 daughter, wise Penelope, \
          has asked me to do it, and I\'92m willing.\
          So for Penelope\'92s sake I\'92ll bathe your feet,\
          and for yours, since the heart in me is stirred\
[490] with sorrow. But come now, listen to me.                                                       \
          Hear what I say. Many worn-out strangers\
          have come here, but none of them, I tell you,\
          was so like him to look at\'97your stature,                                                                         \
          voice, and feet are all just like Odysseus.\'94\
          \
          Then resourceful Odysseus answered her and said:\
          \'93Old woman, those who\'92ve seen the two of us\
          with their own eyes all say the same\'97we both\
          look very like each other, as you\'92ve seen\
          and mentioned.\'94\
          \
          After these words from Odysseus,\
[500] the old woman took the shining bowl to wash his feet.                                 \
          She poured in plenty of cold water and added \
          warmer water to it. Odysseus then sat down\
          some distance from the hearth and quickly turned around\
          towards the darkness. For suddenly in his heart\
          he was afraid that, when she touched him, she might see                                            \
          a scar he had, and then the truth would be revealed.\
          She came up and began to wash her master.\
          She recognized the scar immediately, a wound\
          a boar\'92s white tusk had given him many years ago,\
[510] when he\'92d gone to Parnassus, making a visit                                    \
          to Autolycus, his mother\'92s splendid father, \
          and his sons. That man could surpass all others\
          in thievery and swearing. A god himself, Hermes,\
          had given him those skills. For him he used to burn\
          pleasing offerings, thighs of younger goats and lambs. \
          So Hermes traveled with him, bringing willing favours.\
          When he came to the wealthy land of Ithaca, \
          Autolycus had met his daughter\'92s new born son,                                                                  \
          and once he\'92d finished dinner, Eurycleia\
[520] set the child upon his knees and spoke to him:                                                      \
          \'93Autolycus, you must personally find\
          your daughter\'92s child a name. We\'92ve been praying\
          for a long time now to have this child.\'94\
          \
          So Autolycus then answered her and said:\
          \'93My son-in-law and daughter, give the boy\
          whatever name I say. Since I\'92ve come here\
          as one who\'92s been enraged at many people,\
          men and women, on this all-nourishing earth,\
          let him be called Odysseus, a man of rage.4\
[530] As for me, when he\'92s become a full-grown man                               \
          and comes to see his mother\'92s family home\
          at Parnassus, where I keep my property,\
          I\'92ll give him some of it and send him off.\
          He\'92ll be delighted.\'94\
          \
          It was for that reason,\
          to get those splendid presents from Autolycus,\
          that Odysseus had come. Autolycus and his sons\
          clasped his hand in welcome, greeted him with kindness,\
          and his mother\'92s mother, Amphithea, hugged him,\
          kissed him on the head and both his lovely eyes.\
[540] Autolycus then called out to his noble sons                                      \
          to prepare a meal, and they answered his call.\
          Quickly they brought in a male ox, five years old,                                                              \
          flayed it, and prepared the beast, slicing up the limbs.\
          They cut these skillfully, pierced the meat with spits,\
          roasted them with care, and passed around the portions.\
          Then they dined all day long until the sun went down.\
          They feasted equally\'97their hearts were quite content.\
          But when the sun went down and darkness came,\
          they then lay down to rest and took the gift of sleep. \
[550] But as soon as rose-fingered early Dawn appeared,                                          \
          they went off to the hunt, with Autolycus\'92 sons\
          and dogs, as well. And lord Odysseus left with them.                                                      \
          They climbed up steep, tree-covered Mount Parnassus\
          and quickly reached its windy gullies. By this time,\
          Helios had just begun to strike the fields, \
          rising from deep streams of gently flowing Ocean.\
          The beaters reached a clearing. The dogs went first,\
          ahead of them, following the tracks. Behind them,\
          came Autolycus\'92 sons, with lord Odysseus\
[560] in their group, close to the dogs. He was holding up                        \
          his long-shadowed spear. Now, right there a huge wild boar\
          was lying in a tangled thicket\'97it was so dense\
          the power of watery winds could not get through,                                                              \
          none of Helios\'92 rays could pierce it, and the rain\
          would never penetrate. There were fallen leaves\
          in piles around the place. The sound of rustling feet\
          from men and dogs, as they pushed on the hunt,\
          came round the beast, and he charged from the thicket\
          to confront them\'97his back was really bristling,\
[570] eyes flashing fire, as he stood at bay before them.                                              \
          Odysseus rushed in first, his strong hands gripping\
          the long spear, keen to strike the boar. But the beast\
          got the jump on him and struck him above the knee,\
          charging at him from the side, a long gash in his flesh                                                   \
          sliced by its tusk, but it didn\'92t reach Odysseus\'92 bone.\
          But then Odysseus struck the boar, hitting it\
          on its right shoulder. The bright point of his spear\
          went clean through\'97the boar fell in the dust, squealing,\
          and its life force flew away. Autolycus\'92 dear sons\
[580] attended to the carcass. They skillfully bound up                             \
          the wound on noble, godlike Odysseus, staunching\
          with a spell the flow of his dark blood. And then\
          they quickly went back to their dear father\'92s home.\
          When Autolycus and Autolycus\'92 sons \
          had fully cured him and presented splendid gifts,                                                               \
          they soon sent him back in a joyful frame of mind\
          to his native land in Ithaca. When he got back,\
          his father and his honoured mother were delighted,\
          asked him every detail of how he\'92d got the wound,\
[590] and he told them the truth\'97how, while he was hunting                  \
          with Autolycus\'92 sons when he\'92d gone to Parnassus,\
          a boar\'92s white tusk had gored him. That was the scar\
          the old woman was then holding in her hands.\
          She traced it out and recognized it. She dropped his foot.\
          His leg fell in the basin, and the bronze rang out.\
          It tipped onto its side. Water spilled out on the ground.                                              \
          All at once, joy and sorrow gripped her heart. Her eyes\
          filled up with tears, and her full voice was speechless.\
          She reached up to Odysseus\'92 chin and said:\
          \'93It\'92s true, dear child.\
[600] You are Odysseus, and I didn\'92t know you,                                                     \
          not till I\'92d touched all my master\'92s body.\'94\
          \
          She spoke, and her eyes glanced over at Penelope,\
          anxious to tell her that her husband had come home.\
          But Penelope could not see her face or understand,\
          for Athena had diverted her attention. \
          Then Odysseus\'92 arms reached out for Eurycleia\'97\
          with his right hand he grabbed her by the throat,                                                                \
          and with the other pulled her closer to him.\
          Then he said:\
          \'93My good mother, why this wish\
          to have me slaughtered? You yourself nursed me\
[610] at this breast of yours. Now in the twentieth year,                                 \
          after suffering through numerous ordeals, \
          I\'92ve come back to my native land. And now,\
          you\'92ve recognized me\'97a god has put that\
          in your heart. Stay silent, so in these halls\
          no one else finds out.  I\'92ll tell you something\'97\
          and it will happen. If a god overpowers\
          these arrogant suitors, sets them under me,\
          I\'92ll not spare you, though you are my nurse,\
          when I kill other  women in my home.\'94                                                                           \
          \
          Prudent Eurycleia then answered him:\
[620] \'93My child,                                   \
          what words escaped the barrier of your teeth!\
          You know how strong and firm my spirit is.\
          I\'92ll be as tough as a hard stone or iron.\
          I\'92ll tell you something else. Keep it in mind.\
          If a god does overpower these lordly suitors\
          and sets them under you, then I\'92ll tell you\
          about the women in your home, the ones\
          dishonouring you and those who bear no shame.\'94\
          \
[630] Resourceful Odysseus then answered her and said:                                           \
          \'93Good mother, why speak to me about them?                                                           \
          There\'92s no need. I myself will look at them\
          and get to know each one. But keep this news\
          to yourself. Leave the matter with the gods.\'94\
          \
          Once Odysseus spoke, the old woman left the room\
          to fetch water for his feet, since what she\'92d had before\
          had all been spilled. When she\'92d finished bathing him,\
          she rubbed him with rich oil. Then Odysseus once more\
          pulled his chair closer to the fire to warm himself.\
[640] He hid the scar under his rags. Wise Penelope                                 \
          began to speak. She said:\
          \'93Stranger, there\'92s one small thing\
          I\'92ll ask you for myself. Soon it will be time\
          to take a pleasant rest. And sleep is sweet                                                                      \
          to anyone it seizes, even if he\'92s troubled.\
          But some god has given me unmeasured grief,\
          for every day I get my joy from mourning,\
          from laments, as I look after my own work\
          and supervise the servants in the house.\
          But when night comes and Sleep grips everyone,\
[650] I lie in bed, and piercing worries crowd                                    \
          my throbbing heart and give me great distress,\
          while I mourn. Just as Pandareus\'92 daughter,\
          the nightingale of the green woods, sings out\
          her lovely song when early spring arrives,\
          perched up in thick foliage of the forest,                                                                          \
          and pours forth her richly modulating voice\
          in wailing for her child, beloved Itylus, \
          lord Zethus\'92 son, whom with a sword one day\
          she\'92d killed unwittingly\'97that\'92s how my heart\
[660] moves back and forth in its uncertainty.5                                                        \
          Should I stay with my son and keep careful watch\
          on all possessions and my female slaves\
          and my large and lofty home, honouring\
          my husband\'92s bed and what the people say,\
          or go off with the best of those Achaeans\
          who court me in my halls\'97the one who offers\
          countless bridal gifts. My son, while young                                                                   \
          and with a feeble mind, would not permit\
          that I got married and left my husband\'92s home.\
[670] But now he\'92s grown\'97his youth has reached its limit\'97             \
          he\'92s begging me to go back home again,\
          to leave this house, for he\'92s very worried\
          about the property which these Achaeans\
          are using up. But come, listen to my dream\
          and interpret it for me. In this house\
          I have twenty geese come from the water\
          to eat my wheat. And when I look at them\
          I am delighted. Then from the mountains\
          a huge hook-beaked eagle came and killed them\'97\
[680] snapping all their necks. They lay there in piles,                                     \
          inside my hall, while he was carried up                                                                             \
          into a shining sky. Now in that dream\
          I wept and wailed. Meanwhile, all around me\
          fair-haired women of Achaea gathered,\
          as, in my sorrow, I was there lamenting\
          that the eagle had slaughtered all my geese.\
          But he came back and, sitting on a beam\
          projecting from the roof, checked my sorrow,\
          and in a human voice spoke out to me:\
          \
[690] \'91Daughter of famous Icarius,                                                                            \
          you must be brave. That was no dream,\
          but a true glimpse of what will really happen.\
          The suitors are those geese, and I am here\'97\
          before I was an eagle, but now I\'92ve come\
          as your own husband, who will execute\
          a cruel fate on each and every suitor.\'92                                                                   \
          \
          \'93That\'92s what he said. Then sweet sleep released me.\
          When I looked around the hall, I saw the geese\'97\
          they were pecking at the wheat beside the trough,\
          as they used to do before.\'94\
          \
[700] Resourceful Odysseus                        \
          then answered her and said:\
          \'93Lady, it\'92s quite impossible\
          to twist another meaning from this dream,\
          since the real Odysseus has revealed to you\
          how he will end all this. The suitors\'92 deaths\
          are all plain to see, and not one of them\
          will escape destruction and his fate.\'94\
          \
          Wise Penelope then gave him her reply:\
          \'93Stranger, stories told in dreams are difficult\'97                                                        \
          their meanings are not clear, and for people\
[710] they are not realized in every detail.                                                                    \
          There are two gates for insubstantial dreams,\
          one made of horn and one of ivory.\
          Those which pass through the fresh-cut ivory\
          deceive\'97the words they bring are unfulfilled.\
          Those which come through the gate of polished horn,\
          once some mortal sees them, bring on the truth.\
          But, in my case, I don\'92t think that strange dream\
          came through that gate. It really would have been\
          a welcome thing to me and to my son.\
[720] But I\'92ll tell you something else. Keep it in mind.                                             \
          That morning is already drawing near\
          which will separate me from Odysseus\'92 house,\
          a day of evil omen. I\'92ll now organize\
          a competition featuring those axes\
          he used to set inside his hall, in a line,\
          like a ship\'92s ribs, twelve of them in all.\
          He\'92d stand far off and shoot an arrow through them.6\
          I\'92ll now set up this contest for the suitors.\
          The one whose hand most deftly strings his bow\
[730] and shoots an arrow through all twelve axes                             \
          is the one I\'92ll go with. I\'92ll leave my house,\
          where I\'92ve been married, a very lovely home,                                                            \
          full of what one needs to live\'97even in dreams\
          it will stay in my memory forever.\'94\
          \
          Resourceful Odysseus then answered her and said:\
          \'93Honoured wife of Odysseus, Laertes\'92 son,\
          don\'92t delay this contest in your halls\
          a moment longer. I can assure you,\
          Odysseus will be here with all his schemes,\
[740] before these men pick up the polished bow,                                                \
          string it, and shoot an arrow through the iron.\'94\
          \
          Wise Penelope then answered him:\
          \'93Stranger,\
          if you wished to sit beside me in these halls\
          to bring me pleasure, sleep would never sit                                                                  \
          on these eyelids of mine. But there\'92s no way\
          men can go on forever without sleep.\
          Immortal gods have set a proper time\
          for every man on this grain-bearing earth.\
          So now I\'92ll go up to my upper room\
[750] and lie down on the bed, which is for me                                 \
          a place for grieving, always wet with tears,\
          since Odysseus went to wicked Ilion,\
          a name which never should be mentioned.\
          I\'92ll lie down there. But you can stretch out here,\
          in the house, putting bedding on the floor.\
          Or let the servants make a bed for you.\'94\
          \
          Once she\'92d said this, she went to her bright upper room,                                           \
          not alone, for two attendant women went with her.\
          When she and her servants reached the upper room,\
[760] she cried out for Odysseus, her dear husband,                                                        \
          till bright-eyed Athena cast sweet sleep on her eyelids.\
}