{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf460
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural\qc

\f0\fs24 \cf0 BOOK TWENTY\
Odysseus Prepares for his Revenge\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural
\cf0 [Odysseus has trouble sleeping; Athena visits him and gives him reassurance; Penelope prays to Artemis, longing for her life to end; Odysseus asks Zeus for two omens; Zeus peals his thunder and a woman grinding grain prays aloud to Zeus; Telemachus asks Eurycleia about the treatment of his guest; Eurycleia organizes the clean up the house; Eumaeus arrives with some animals and talks to Odysseus; Melanthius insults Odysseus again; Philoetius arrives and talks to Eumaeus, then wishes Odysseus well; the suitors plan to kill Telemachus but are dissuaded by an omen; Telemachus tells Odysseus he\'92ll protect him at the feast and speaks forcefully to the suitors; Ctesippus throws a piece of meat at Odysseus, but misses; Telemachus threatens him; Agelaus proposes that Penelope make up her mind; Pallas Athena makes the suitors laugh uncontrollably and sends images of disaster; Theoclymenus interprets them and warns the suitors; they all laugh at Telemachus; Penelope sits and listens to the conversations.]\
          So lord Odysseus went to the portico to sleep.\
          Underneath he spread an untanned hide and on top\
          fleeces from many sheep slaughtered for sacrifice\
          by the Achaeans. Eurynome spread a cloak on him,\
          once he lay down to rest. But he couldn\'92t sleep.\
          His heart was hatching trouble for the suitors.\
          Then the women went out from the hall, the ones\
          who in earlier days had had sex with the suitors.\
          They were laughing, having fun with one another.\
  [10] Odysseus\'92 spirit in his chest was stirred\'97mind and heart                           \
          engaged in fierce debate whether he should charge out\
          and put each one to death or let them and the suitors\
          have sex one last and final time. Inside him\
          his heart was growling. Just as a bitch stands snarling\
          above her tender pups when she sees anyone\
          she does not recognize and is prepared to fight,\
          that how in his anger the heart within him growled\
          at their disgraceful acts. But he struck his chest and said,\
          as a rebuke to his own heart:\
          \'93Hang on, my heart.\
  [20] You went through things worse than this that day                    \
          the Cyclops, in his frantic rage, devoured\
          your strong companions. You held out then,                                                              \
          until your cunning led you from that cave,\
          where you thought you would die.\'94\
          \
          He said these words,\
          to hold down the heart within his chest, and his spirit\
          submitted, enduring everything with resolution.\
          But he still tossed back and forth. Just as a man\
          turns quickly to and fro on a blazing fire a stomach\
          stuffed with fat and blood when he\'92s keen to roast it fast,\
  [30] that how Odysseus tossed around, wondering                                  \
          how he might get the shameless suitors in his grip,\
          one man against so many. Then Athena came,                                                                    \
          moving down from heaven, looking like a woman.\
          She stood above his head and spoke to him, saying:\
          \'93Why now, you most ill-fated of all men,\
          are you awake? This is your home, and here,\
          inside this house, your wife and child, a man\
          whom anyone would pray for as a son.\'94\
          \
          Resourceful Odysseus then answered her and said:\
  [40] \'93Yes, goddess, everything you say is true.                                                        \
          But the heart inside my chest is worried\'97\
          How can I handle the shameful suitors,\
          just a single man against so many.                                                                                        \
          And in the house they\'92re always in a group.\
          There\'92s something else my heart is thinking of\'97\
          it\'92s more important, too\'97if I do kill them,\
          with Zeus\'92 help and yours, how do I find\
          a way of making my escape? That\'92s something\
          I\'92d ask you to consider.\'94 \
          \
          Then the goddess,\
          bright-eyed Athena, gave him her reply:\
  [50] \'93You stubborn man,                                      \
          men put their trust in weaker friends than me\'97\
          in a mortal man who lacks my wisdom.\
          I\'92m a god, and I\'92m there to protect you\
          to the end in all your troubles. I tell you\'97\
          to make things clear\'97if there were fifty groups\
          of mortal men taking a stand around us,                                                                       \
          eager to slaughter us in war, even so,\
          you\'92d still drive off their cattle and fine sheep.\
          Let Sleep take hold of you. To stay awake,\
  [60] on guard all night, will make you weary.                                                         \
          You\'92ll soon come out from under these bad times.\'94\
          \
          After Athena spoke, she poured sleep on his eyelids.\
          Then the lovely goddess went back to Olympus.\
          While Sleep, who relaxes troubled human hearts, \
          relaxed his mind, his faithful wife woke up and cried,\
          sitting there on her soft bed. But when her heart\
          had had its fill of crying, the lovely lady \
          began by saying a prayer to Artemis:                                                                                              \
          \'93Artemis,\
          royal goddess, Zeus\'92 daughter, how I wish\
  [70] you\'92d shoot an arrow in my chest right now                             \
          and take my life or a storm wind would come,\
          lift me up, carry me away from here,\
          across the murky roads, and cast me out\
          in Ocean\'92s backward-flowing stream, just as\
          storms snatched up Pandareus\'92 daughters,\
          whose parents the gods killed, thus leaving them\
          orphans in their home. Fair Aphrodite\
          looked after them with cheese, sweet honey,\
          and fine wine, while Hera offered them                                                  \
  [80] beauty and wisdom beyond all women.                                                            \
          Chaste Artemis made them tall, and Athena           \
          gave them their skills in famous handicrafts.\
          But when fair Aphrodite went away\
          to high Olympus, petitioning Zeus,\
          who hurls the thunderbolt, that the girls\
          could find fulfillment in a happy marriage,\
          for Zeus has perfect knowledge of all things,\
          what each man\'92s destiny will be or not,\
          that\'92s when storm spirits snatched away the girls\
  [90] and placed them in the care of hateful Furies.1                                          \
          How I wish those gods who hold Olympus\
          would do away with me like that, or else\
          that fair-haired Artemis would strike at me,                                                                \
          so with Odysseus\'92 image in my mind\
          I could descend beneath this hateful earth\
          and never bring delight of any kind\
          into the heart of some inferior man.\
          But when a man laments all day, his heart\
          thick with distress, and sleep holds him at night,\
[100] that evil can be borne\'97sleep makes one forget                       \
          all things good and bad, once it settles down\
          across one\'92s eyelids. But some god sends me\
          bad dreams as well. This very night again\
          a man who looked like him lay down beside me,\
          just as he was when he went with the troops.\
          My heart rejoiced\'97I thought it was no dream,                                                        \
          but finally the truth.\'94\
          \
          Penelope finished.\
          Then Dawn came on her golden throne. As she wept,\
          lord Odysseus heard her voice and lost himself in thought.\
[110] To his heart it seemed she knew him and was standing there,               \
          beside his head. He gathered up the cloak and blankets\
          he was lying on and placed them on a chair\
          inside the hall. He took an ox-hide from the house,\
          set it on the ground, and, lifting up his hands, \
          made this prayer to Zeus:\
          \'93O Father Zeus,\
          if you wished to bring me over land and sea\
          to my own land, when you had given me\
          so much distress, let someone in the house\
          wake up and say something in there for me,                                                               \
[120] a word of omen, and here outside the house                            \
          let there appear another sign from Zeus.\'94\
          \
          That\'92s what he prayed. And Counselor Zeus heard him.\
          At once he thundered down from glittering Olympus,\
          from high beyond the clouds. Lord Odysseus rejoiced.\
          And then some woman grinding on the stones close by\
          sent out a word of omen from inside the place\
          where the shepherd of his people placed his millstones.2\
          At these grinding stones twelve women used to work,\
          making barley meal and flour, which feed men\'92s marrow.\
[130] The other women had already ground their wheat                           \
          and were asleep, but this one, weaker than the rest,                                                        \
          had not yet finished. She stopped her grinding stone\
          and said these words, an omen for her master:\
          \'93Father Zeus, who rules both gods and men,\
          you\'92ve thundered loud up in the starry sky,\
          and yet there\'92s not a single cloud up there.\
          You must be offering a sign to someone.\
          I\'92m a poor wretch, but what I have to say,\
          oh, make that happen. May these suitors here\
[140] for the last and final time this very day                                     \
          have a pleasant dinner in Odysseus\'92 home.\
          Those men have hurt my knees with this hard work\
          grinding flour\'97may this meal be their last.\'94\
          \
          She spoke. That word of omen and Zeus\'92 thunder                                                              \
          made lord Odysseus happy\'97he thought he\'92d be revenged\
          on those malicious men. \
          Inside Odysseus\'92 lovely home,\
          other women slaves were up and making tireless fire\
          inside the hearth, and then godlike Telemachus\
          got out of bed, put on his clothes, and from his shoulders\
[150] slung a keen-edged sword. Under his shining feet he tied                \
          his lovely sandals. He picked up a sturdy spear,\
          with a sharp bronze point, then went out to the threshold,\
          stood there, and said to Eurycleia: \
          \'93My dear nurse,\
          have you shown our guest respect inside our home\
          with bed and food, or is he still lying there                                                                    \
          unattended to? That\'92s how my mother is,\
          although she\'92s wise. She seems to deal with men\
          at random\'97some inferior mortal man\
          she\'92ll honour, while some finer person \
[160] she\'92ll send away with no respect at all.\'94                                                            \
          \
          Wise Eurycleia then answered him:\
          \'93My child,\
          don\'92t blame her now about such things. That man\
          sat here drinking wine as long as he could wish.\
          He said he had no appetite for food.\
          She asked him. When he thought of going to bed\
          to get some sleep, she told the women slaves\
          to spread out bedding, but like a wretched man                                                      \
          familiar with hard times, he had no wish\
          to lie down under blankets on a bed.\
[170] So he stretched out on the portico to sleep                               \
          on sheep fleeces and an untanned ox-hide,\
          and then we threw a cloak on top of him.\'94\
          \
          Once she\'92d finished, Telemachus went through the hall,\
          spear in hand, with two swift dogs accompanying him.\
          He went to join the group of finely dressed Achaeans.\
          Then that good woman Eurycleia, daughter of Ops, \
          Peisenor\'92s son, called out, summoning female slaves:\
          \'93Come on, some of you get busy here\'97\
          sweep the hall and sprinkle it. Then spread out                                                        \
[180] purple covers on these well-fashioned chairs.                                             \
          You others, wipe down all those tables\
          with sponges, clean up the mixing bowls,\
          those finely crafted double-handled cups.\
          And you others, get water from the spring.\
          Carry it back here. And do it quickly\'97\
          the suitors won\'92t be absent from this hall\
          for very long. They\'92ll be back really soon.\
          Today\'92s a banquet day for everyone.\'94\
          \
          As Eurycleia spoke, they all listened carefully,\
[190] then acted on her words. Twenty of the women                              \
          went to the dark-water spring. The others stayed there,\
          busy working expertly throughout the house.\
          Then the men who served Achaean lords arrived.                                                              \
          While they were chopping wood skillfully and well,\
          the women slaves who\'92d gone off to the spring returned.\
          Behind them came the swineherd, leading in three hogs,\
          the best of all he had. He turned them loose to feed\
          inside the lovely yard, while he talked to Odysseus,\
          with words of reassurance:\
          \'93Stranger, these Achaeans\'97\
[200] do they have any more regard for you?                                                             \
          Or in these halls are they dishonouring you,\
          they way they did before?\'94\
          \
          Shrewd Odysseus\
          then answered him and said: \
          \'93Well, Eumaeus,\
          I hope the gods pay back the injuries\
          arrogant men so recklessly have planned                                                                       \
          in someone else\'92s home, with no sense of shame.\'94\
          \
          As these two were saying these words to one another,\
          Melanthius, the goatherd, came up close to them,\
          leading the very finest she-goats in his flocks,\
[210] part of the suitors\'92 feast. Two herdsmen came with him.                             \
          He tied the goats up by the echoing portico,\
          then started hurling his insults at Odysseus:\
          \'93Stranger, are you still bothering us here,\
          inside the house, begging from the people?\
          Why don\'92t you get out? I think it\'92s clear                                                                           \
          the two of us won\'92t say goodbye, until\
          we\'92ve had a taste of one another\'92s fists.\
          The way you beg is not appropriate.\
          Achaeans do have feasts in other places.\'94                   \
          \
[220] Melanthius spoke, but shrewd Odysseus said nothing.                                   \
          He shook his head in silence. Deep in his heart\
          he was planning trouble. Then a third one joined them,\
          Philoetius, an outstanding man, bringing in\
          a sterile heifer and plump she-goats for the suitors.\
          Ferrymen, who transport other men across, \
          whoever comes to them, had brought them over\
          from the mainland. He tied these animals with care\
          below the echoing portico, walked up to the swineherd,                                              \
          and questioned him in person:\
          \'93Swineherd,\
[230] who\'92s the man who\'92s just come to this house?                                            \
          What people does he claim to come from?\
          Where are his family and his native land?\
          He\'92s had bad luck, but in his appearance \
          he seems to be a royal king. But still,\
          the gods bring miseries to wandering men,\
          whenever they spin their threads of trouble,\
          even though those men are royalty.\'94\
          \
          Once he\'92d said this, he walked up to Odysseus,\
          held his right hand out in greeting, and spoke to him\'97\
          his words had wings:\
[240] \'93Greetings, honoured stranger.                                        \
          Though you\'92re facing many troubles now,\
          may you find happiness in future days.                                                                             \
          O Father Zeus, none of the other gods\
          is more destructive than you are. For men,\
          once you yourself have given birth to them,\
          you have no pity. You get them involved\
          with misery and painful wretchedness.\
          When I recall Odysseus and think of him,\
          I start to sweat. My eyes fill up with tears.\
[250] For he, too, I think, is dressed in rags like these,                                     \
          wandering among men somewhere, if indeed\
          he\'92s still alive, looking at the sunlight.\
          If he\'92s already dead in Hades\'92 home,\
          then I grieve for excellent Odysseus,\
          who, when I was still a boy, put me in charge\
          of cattle in the Cephallenians\'92 land.3                                                                                    \
          Their numbers now are more than one can count\'97\
          this breed of broad-faced cattle has increased\
          more than it could in any other way\
[260] for a different man. Now strangers tell me                               \
          to drive the cattle in for their own meals.\
          They don\'92t care about the son inside the house\
          or tremble at the vengeance of the gods.\
          Now they\'92re keen to share amongst themselves\
          my master\'92s goods\'97he\'92s been away so long.\
          As for me, the heart here in my chest\
          keeps turning over many things\'97it\'92s bad,\
          really bad, while his son is still alive,\
          for me to leave here with the cattle herds\
[270] and head off to some other district,                                                                      \
          to a group of strangers. But it\'92s even worse                                                                   \
          to stay here, putting up with so much trouble,\
          to herd these cattle going to other men.\
          In fact, I would have run off long ago\
          to one of the other high-minded kings\'97\
          for things are now unbearable\'97but still,\
          that unlucky man is always on my mind.\
          Perhaps he might come home from somewhere \
          and send the suitors packing from his home.\'94\
          \
[280] Resourceful Odysseus then answered him and said:                                         \
          \'93Herdsman, you don\'92t appear to be a man\
          who\'92s bad or one who lacks intelligence.\
          I see for myself your understanding heart.\
          And so I\'92ll swear a powerful oath to you.\
          I\'92ll speak the truth\'97let Zeus be my witness,                                                                \
          first among the gods, and this guest table,\
          and the hearth of excellent Odysseus,\
          to which I\'92ve come\'97While you are present here\
          Odysseus will come home. With your own eyes,\
[290] you\'92ll see the suitors killed, if that\'92s your wish,                                          \
          those men who act as if they own the place.\'94\
          \
          The cattle herder answered him:\
          \'93Ah stranger, \
          how I wish Cronos\'92 son might bring about\
          what you\'92ve just said. Then you\'92d find out\
          how strong I am and what my hands can do.\'94\
          \
          Eumaeus also prayed like that to all the gods\
          for wise Odysseus to return to his own home.\
          As they were talking in this way to one another,                                                                  \
          the suitors were making plans against Telemachus,\
[300] scheming to bring him to a fatal destiny.                                                                     \
          But then a bird went soaring past them, on their left, \
          an eagle flying up high, gripping a trembling dove.\
          So Amphinomus addressed them all and said:\
          \'93My friends, this plan to kill Telemachus\
          will not proceed the way we want it to.\
          We should instead prepare to have our feast.\'94\
          \
          Amphinomus spoke, and they agreed with him.\
          So they went inside godlike Odysseus\'92 home,\
          threw their cloaks on stools and chairs, and sacrificed                                                   \
[310] big sheep and fattened goats. They killed plump swine, as well,          \
          and the heifer from the herd. They roasted entrails,\
          passed them round, and blended wine in mixing bowls.\
          The swineherd handed out the cups. Philoetius,\
          an outstanding man, served bread in a fine basket.\
          Melanthius poured their wine. And then their hands\
          reached out to take the fine food set before them.\
          Thinking it would work to his advantage, Telemachus\
          sat Odysseus down inside the well-constructed hall,\
          beside the entrance made of stone, then set for him\
[320] a modest stool and tiny table. He placed before him                       \
          a share of inner organs and poured out some wine                                                           \
          into a golden cup. Then he said:\
          \'93Sit here for now,\
          among these men and drink your wine. I myself\
          will protect you from all suitors\'92 insults\
          and their fists\'97this is not a public house\
          but a home belonging to Odysseus,\
          and he acquired this place for me. You suitors,\
          make sure your hearts do not encourage you\
          to gibes and blows, so that no arguments \
          or fights will happen here.\'94\
          \
[330] Once he\'92d finished speaking,                               \
          all the suitors bit their lips. They were astonished\
          Telemachus had talked to them so forcefully.\
          Then Antinous, Eupeithes\'92 son, spoke out to them:                                                           \
          \'93Achaeans, what Telemachus has said\
          is challenging, but let\'92s accept his words,\
          although his speech is a bold threat to us.\
          For Zeus, son of Cronos, has not given\
          his permission, or here within these halls\
          by this time we\'92d have put a stop to him,\
          for all his clear-voiced talk.\'94\
          \
[340] Antinous spoke.                                      \
          But Telemachus ignored what he\'92d just said.\
          Meanwhile, as heralds led offerings sacred to the gods\
          down through the city, long-haired Achaeans gathered\
          underneath archer god Apollo\'92s shadowy grove.\
          They cooked the outer flesh and pulled away the spits,\
          then shared the meat and had a splendid banquet.4                                                         \
          The servers placed beside Odysseus a portion\
          matching what they received themselves\'97Telemachus,\
          godlike Odysseus\'92 son, had given them those orders.\
[350] But there was no way Athena would permit                                     \
          those proud suitors to hold back their bitter insults,\
          so that Odysseus, Laertes\'92 son, would suffer\
          still more heartfelt pain. Now, among the suitors\
          there was man who had a lawless heart. His name\
          was Ctesippus, and he made his home in Same.\
          Relying on his prodigious wealth, he courted\
          the wife of Odysseus, who\'92d been away so long.                                                                   \
          He now addressed the overbearing suitors:\
          \'93You noble suitors, listen to me now\'97\
[360] I\'92ve got something to say. This stranger here                            \
          has for some time had an equal portion,\
          as is right, since it\'92s by no means proper,\
          nor is it just, for Telemachus\'92 guests\
          to go without\'97no matter who it is\
          who shows up at the house. So now I, too,\
          will provide a gift to welcome him.\
          Then he, for his part, can pass it along\
          to some bath attendant or some other slave\
          here in the home of godlike Odysseus.\'94\
          \
[370] As he said this, his strong hand picked up an ox hoof                      \
          from the basket where it lay, and then he hurled it.                                                         \
          But by quickly pulling his head back, Odysseus\
          dodged the throw. In his heart he smiled with bitter scorn.\
          The gristle hit the solid wall. Telemachus\
          then went at Ctesippus and said:\
          \'93Ctesippus,\
          in your heart you understand what\'92s good for you\'97\
          that\'92s must be why you didn\'92t hit the stranger. \
          He escaped your throw all on his own. \
          Otherwise, I\'92d have taken my sharp spear\
[380] and rammed you in the chest. Then your father                       \
          would be here planning for your funeral\
          and not a wedding feast. So none of you\
          make any show of trouble in my house.\
          For now I am observing every detail\'97\
          both good and bad\'97I know what\'92s going on.\
          Before now, I was still a foolish child.                                                                                 \
          But we must still look on and bear these things\'97\
          the slaughtered sheep, the wine and bread consumed.\
          It\'92s hard for one man to restrain so many.\
[390] So come, no longer show me such ill will                                  \
          or give me so much trouble. If you\'92re keen\
          to kill me with your swords, that\'92s what I\'92d choose\'97\
          it would be far better to meet my death\
          than constantly to watch these shameful deeds,\
          strangers being abused and female servants\
          dragged through this lovely home. It\'92s a disgrace.\'94\
          \
          Telemachus finished. They all sat in silence,                                                                            \
          saying nothing. At last Agelaus, Damastor\'92s son,\
          addressed them:\
          \'93My friends, no man could answer\
[400] what\'92s been so justly said and in his rage                                  \
          respond with words provoking enmity.\
          So don\'92t insult the stranger any more\
          or any of the servants in this home\
          belonging to godlike Odysseus. Still,\
          to Telemachus and to his mother\
          I have some reassuring things to say,\
          which both their hearts should find agreeable.\
          As long as you had in your hearts some hope\
          that wise Odysseus would return back home,\
[410] no blame attached itself to you by waiting,                                                            \
          holding off the suitors in your house.\
          This was the better choice, if Odysseus\
          had returned and come back to his palace.\
          But surely it\'92s already clear by now\
          he won\'92t be coming back, not any more.\
          So come, sit down beside your mother. Tell her\
          to marry whoever is the finest man\
          and offers the best bridal gifts. And then,\
          you can enjoy all your paternal goods\
[420] as yours to keep, all the food and wine,                                                            \
          while she looks after someone else\'92s home.\'94\
          \
          Shrewd Telemachus then answered him and said:\
          \'93I swear to you, Agelaus, by Zeus\
          and by the sufferings of my father,\
          who\'92s perished or is wandering around                                                                             \
          somewhere far from Ithaca, there\'92s no way\
          I\'92m trying to delay my mother\'92s marriage.\
          I tell her to marry any man she wants,\
          and I\'92ll give her innumerable gifts.\
[430] But I\'92m ashamed to drive her from the home                           \
          against her wishes, to give an order\
          which forces her to leave. I hope the god\
          will never bring about something like that.\'94\
          \
          Once Telemachus had spoken, Pallas Athena\
          roused them all to laugh with no sense of control.\
          She unhinged their minds, so laughter from their mouths\
          came from an alien source, and the meat they ate\
          became blood-spattered. Their eyes filled up with tears.5\
          Their hearts were crammed with thoughts of lamentation.\
[440] Then godlike Theoclymenus addressed them all:                                                         \
          \'93O you miserable men, what troubles\
          are you suffering now? Your heads, your faces,\
          your lower limbs are shrouded in the night.\
          You\'92re on fire with grief, faces wet with tears,\
          fine pedestals and walls have gobs of blood,\
          the porch is full of ghosts, so is the yard\'97\
          ghosts rushing in the dark to Erebus.\
          Up in the sky the sun has disappeared\'97\
          an evil mist is covering everything.\'94\
          \
[450] Theoclymenus finished. But they all laughed,                                                          \
          enjoying themselves at his expense. The first to speak\
          was Eurymachus, son of Polybus:\
          \'93He\'92s mad,                                                                   \
          this stranger who\'92s just recently arrived\
          from some foreign land. Come on, young men,\
          hurry and carry him outside the house,\
          so he can make his way to the assembly,\
          since he thinks it\'92s like the night in here.\'94\
          \
          Godlike Theoclymenus then said in reply:\
          \'93Eurymachus, I\'92m not requesting you\
[460] to furnish me with guides. I\'92ve got my eyes                              \
          and my two feet. And in my chest\
          I\'92ve got a mind that\'92s not made for a fool.\
          I\'92ll go outside with these, for I can see\
          you\'92re headed for disaster\'97no suitors\
          who, in the home of godlike Odysseus,\
          mistreat others and plan their reckless schemes\
          will be able to avoid it or escape.\'94                                                                                           \
          \
          After he\'92d said this, he left the stately palace\
          and went to Peiraeus, who gladly welcomed him.\
[470] But all the suitors looked around at one another                             \
          and tried to hurt Telemachus with mockery,\
          laughing at his guests. Some arrogant young man\
          would make a comment using words like these:\
          \'93Telemachus,\
          no one is more unlucky with his guests\
          than you are. You have a man like this one,\
          a dirty tramp in need of food and wine,\
          with no work skills or strength, just a burden\
          on the land. Then some other man stood here                                                          \
          and made a prophecy. You\'92d be better off\
[480] to follow what I say. Let\'92s throw these guests                            \
          onboard a well-decked ship and send them off\
          to the Sicilians. You\'92d get good prices there.\'94\
          \
          That\'92s what the suitors said. But Telemachus\
          paid no attention to their words. He kept quiet,\
          looking at his father, always watching him\
          to see when his hands would fight the shameless suitors.\
          But wise Penelope, Icarius\'92 daughter,\
          had set in place a lovely chair across from them.\
          She heard what each man in the hall was saying.\
[490] While they kept laughing, the men prepared a meal,                                      \
          something sweet to satisfy their hearts, slaughtering\
          many beasts. But there would never be another meal                                                   \
          more sorrowful than the one the mighty warrior\
          and the goddess would set before them very soon.\
          With their shameful plans, the suitors brought this on.\
}