{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf460
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural\qc

\f0\fs24 \cf0 BOOK TWENTY-ONE\
The Contest with Odysseus\'92 Bow\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural
\cf0           \
Penelope decides to set up the archery contest with the axes; she goes to a storeroom to fetch the bow, arrows, and axes; the story of how Odysseus got the bow from Iphitus; Penelope addresses the suitors, saying she will marry whoever succeeds in the competition; Eumaeus and Philoetius weep; Antinous upbraids them; Telemachus addresses the suitors, sets up the bows in line, and tries unsuccessfully to string the bow; Leiodes attempts to string the bow and fails; Antinous criticizes Leiodes, then suggests they rub fat on the bow by the fire to make it more supple; Odysseus reveals his identity outside to Eumaeus and Philoetius and gives them instructions; Eurymachus tries to string the bow and fails; Antinous proposes they postpone the contest for today; Odysseus suggests he be given a chance to succeed with the bow; Antinous objects; Penelope intervenes; Telemachus tells his mother to go upstairs; Eumaeus hands the bow to Odysseus and orders Eurycleia to lock the doors; Philoetius closes the courtyard gates; Odysseus inspects the bow, then fires an arrow through the holes in the axe heads; Telemachus arms himself and moves to stand with his father.]\
          \
          Bright-eyed Athena then placed inside the heart\
          of wise Penelope, Icarius\'92 daughter,\
          the thought that she should set up in Odysseus\'92 halls\
          the bow and the gray iron axes for the suitors,\
          as a competition and the prelude to their deaths.\
          She climbed the lofty staircase to her chamber,\
          picked up in her firm grip a curved key made of bronze\'97\
          beautifully fashioned with an ivory handle. \
          With her attendants she went off to a storeroom\
  [10] in a distant corner of the house, where they kept                             \
          her king\'92s possessions\'97bronze and gold and iron,                                                          \
          all finely crafted work. His well-sprung bow was there,\
          and quivers, too, with lots of painful arrows,\
          gifts he had received from Iphitus, his friend,\
          son of Eurytus, a man like the immortals,\
          when they\'92d met in Lacedaemon, in Messene,\
          at the home of wise Ortilochus. Odysseus\
          had gone there to collect a debt the people owed\'97\
          Messenian men had run off with three hundred sheep\
  [20] and seized the shepherds, too, leaving Ithaca                                   \
          in their ships with many oars. Because of this,\
          Odysseus, who was just a boy, had been sent                                                                         \
          a long way by his father and other senior men,\
          part of an embassy. Iphitus was searching\
          for twelve mares he\'92d lost and sturdy mules, as well,\
          still on the teat. Later on these animals\
          led him to a fatal destiny, the day he met\
          the mortal Hercules, Zeus\'92 great-hearted son,\
          who knew all there was to know about great exploits.\
  [30] Hercules slaughtered him, although he was a guest                          \
          in his own home\'97a cruel man who didn\'92t care\
          about the anger of the gods or the dining table\
          he\'92d set before him. After their meal, he killed him\
          and kept the strong-hoofed mares with him at home                                                     \
          for his own use.1  While Iphitus was enquiring\
          about these horses, he got to meet Odysseus\
          and gave him the bow. In earlier days, this weapon\
          had been used by mighty Eurytus, and when he died,\
          he\'92d left it for his son in his high-roofed home.\
  [40] Odysseus had given him a keen-edged sword                                  \
          and a powerful spear, as well. This was the start\
          of their close friendship. But they never bonded\
          as mutual dinner guests\'97before that happened\
          Zeus\'92 son had murdered Iphitus, son of Eurytus,\
          a man like the immortals, who gave Odysseus\
          that bow of his. Lord Odysseus never took it\
          whenever he went off to war in his black ships.\
          It lay there in his home as a memorial                                                                                           \
          to a dear friend. He carried it in his own land.\
  [50] When fair Penelope came to the storage room,                                                    \
          she crossed the wooden threshold\'97a long time ago\
          a skilful craftsman planed it, set it straight and true,\
          then fitted doorposts and set shining doors in place.\
          She quickly took the looped thong from its hook,\
          put in the key, and with a push shoved back the bolt.2\
          Just as a bull grunts when it grazes in a meadow,\
          that how the key\'92s force made the fine door creak,                                                          \
          and it quickly swung ajar. She stepped high up,\
          onto the planking where the storage trunks were placed\
  [60] in which they kept their fragrant clothing. There she stretched        \
          to take the bow in its bright case down from its peg.\
          She then sat down, placed the bow case on her knees,\
          and wept aloud, as she took out her husband\'92s bow.\
          When she\'92d had enough of her laments and tears,\
          she went off to the hall, to join the noble suitors,\
          holding in her hands the well-sprung bow and quiver,\
          with many pain-inflicting arrows. And with her                                                                   \
          came some servants carrying a chest which held\
          lots of iron and bronze, her husband\'92s battle weapons.\
  [70] Once the lovely lady reached the suitors, she stood there,                         \
          by the door post of the well-constructed hall,\
          with a bright veil on her face. On either side\
          stood loyal attendant women. Then Penelope\
          addressed the suitors with these words:\
          \'93Listen to me,\
          bold suitors, who\'92ve been ravaging this home\
          with your incessant need for food and drink,\
          since my husband\'92s now been so long absent.                                                          \
          The only story you could offer up\
          as an excuse is that you all desire\
  [80] to marry me and take me as your wife.                                                             \
          So come now, suitors, since I seem to be\
          the prize you seek, I\'92ll place this great bow here\
          belonging to godlike Odysseus. And then,\
          whichever one of you can grip this bow \
          and string it with the greatest ease, then shoot\
          an arrow through twelve axes, all of them, \
          I\'92ll go with him, leaving my married home,\
          this truly lovely house and all these goods\
          one needs to live\'97things I\'92ll remember,\
          even in my dreams.\'94\
          \
  [90] When she\'92d said this,                                                 \
          she then told Eumaeus, the loyal swineherd,\
          to set the bow and gray iron axes for the suitors.\
          With tears in his eyes, Eumaeus picked them up\
          and laid them out. Philoetius, the goatherd,\
          was weeping, too, in another spot, once he saw\
          his master\'92s bow. Then Antinous addressed them both\
          with this reproach:\
          \'93You foolish bumpkins,\
          who only think of what\'92s going on today!\
          What a wretched pair! Why start weeping now?\
[100] Why stir the heart inside the lady\'92s breast?                                                    \
          Her spirit lies in pain, now that she\'92s lost\
          the man she loves. So sit and eat in silence,\
          or go outside and weep. Leave the bow here.                                                              \
          The contest will decide among the suitors.\
          I don\'92t think it will be an easy feat\
          to string that polished bow. Of all men here,\
          no one is like Odysseus used to be.\
          I saw him for myself, and I remember,\
          though at the time I was a little child.\'94\
          \
[110] Antinous spoke. In his chest his heart was hoping                            \
          he would string the bow and then shoot an arrow\
          through the iron.3  But, in fact, he\'92d be the first\
          to taste an arrow from brave Odysseus\'92 hands\'97\
          the very man he was disgracing shamefully,\
          as he sat in the hall, inciting all his comrades.                                                                        \
          Then among them all Telemachus spoke out\
          with royal authority:\
          \'93Well now, Zeus,\
          son of Cronos, must have made me foolish\'97\
          my dear mother, although quite sensible,\
[120] says she\'92ll be leaving with another man,                                                          \
          abandoning this home, and I just laugh.\
          My witless heart finds that enjoyable.\
          So come, suitors, since your prize seems to be\
          a woman who throughout Achaean land\
          has no equal, not in sacred Pylos, \
          Argos, or Mycenae, not on the mainland,\
          or in Ithaca itself. But you yourselves\
          know this. Why should I praise my mother?                                                                \
          So come on. Don\'92t delay this competition\
[130] with excuses or use up too much time                                       \
          diverting your attention from this bow string.\
          Then we\'92ll see. I might try the bow myself.\
          If I can string it and shoot an arrow\
          through the iron, I won\'92t get so upset\
          when my royal mother has to leave here\
          with another man. I\'92d be left behind,\
          as someone capable of picking up\
          fine prizes from my father in a contest.\'94\
          \
          After he\'92d said this, Telemachus threw off\
[140] the purple cloak covering his back, jumped up,                                                     \
          and removed the sharp sword from his shoulders.\
          First, he set up the axes. He dug a trench,                                                                                   \
          one long ditch for all of them, in a straight line.\
          Then he stamped the earth down flat around them.\
          Amazement gripped all those observing him\
          to watch him organize those axes properly,\
          although before that time he\'92d never seen them.\
          Then, going and standing in the threshold, he tried\
          to test the bow. Three times he made it tremble,\
[150] as he strove to bend it, and three times he relaxed,                                          \
          hoping in his heart he\'92d string that bow and shoot\
          an arrow through the iron. On his fourth attempt, \
          as his power bent the bow, he might have strung it,\
          but Odysseus shook his head, motioning him to stop,\
          for all his eagerness. So Telemachus spoke out,                                                                    \
          addressing them once more with royal authority:\
          \'93Well, I suppose I\'92ll remain a coward,\
          a weak man, too, in future days, or else\
          I\'92m still too young and cannot yet rely\
[160] on my own strength to guard me from a man                          \
          who gets angry with me first. But come now,\
          you men who are more powerful than me,\
          test this bow. Let\'92s end this competition.\'94\
          \
          Once he\'92d said this, Telemachus placed the bow\
          down on the ground away from him, leaning it\
          against the polished panels of the door, and set\
          a swift arrow there beside the bow\'92s fine tip,\
          then sat down again in the chair from which he\'92d stood.\
          Then Antinous, Eupeithes\'92 son, addressed them:                                                                 \
[170] \'93All you comrades, get up in order now,                                                          \
          from left to right, beginning from the place\
          where the steward pours the wine.\'94\
          \
          Antinous spoke,\
          and what he\'92d just proposed they found agreeable.\
          The first to stand up was Leiodes, son of Oenops,\
          their soothsayer. He always sat furthest away,\
          beside the lovely mixing bowl\'97the only man\
          hostile to their reckless acts\'97he was angry\
          with the suitors, all of them. That was the man\
          who first picked up the bow and the swift arrow.\
[180] After moving to the threshold and standing there,                                             \
          he tried the bow, but couldn\'92t string it. His hands,                                                             \
          which were delicate and weak, grew weary,\
          before he could succeed in stringing up the bow. \
          He then spoke out among the suitors:\
          \'93My friends,\
          I\'92m not the man to string this bow. So now,\
          let someone else take hold of it. This bow\
          will take away from many excellent men\
          their lives and spirits, since it\'92s far better \
          to die than live and fail in the attempt\
[190] to have what we are gathered here to get,                                                      \
          always waiting in hope day after day.\
          Now every man has feelings in his heart\'97\
          he desires and hopes to wed Penelope, \
          Odysseus\'92 wife. But when he\'92s tried this bow\
          and observed what happens, then let him woo\
          another of Achaea\'92s well-dressed women,                                                                      \
          seeking to win her with his bridal gifts,\
          and then Penelope can wed the man\
          who offers her the most, whose fate it is\
          to be her husband.\'94\
          \
[200] When Leiodes had finished,                                  \
          he set the bow away from him, leaning it \
          against the polished panels of the door\
          and placing a swift arrow by the fine bow-tip.\
          Then he sat again on the chair he\'92d risen from.\
          But Antinous took issue with what he\'92d just said,\
          talking directly to him:\
          \'93Leiodes,\
          that speech that passed the barrier of your teeth,\
          what wretched, sorry words!  As I listened,\
          it made me angry\'97as if this bow would,                                                                         \
[210] in fact, take away the lives and spirits                                       \
          of the very finest men, just because \
          you couldn\'92t string it. Your royal mother\
          did not produce in you the sort of man\
          who has sufficient strength to draw a bow\
          and shoot an arrow. But some other men\
          among these noble suitors will soon string it.\'94\
          \
          This said, Antinous called out to Melanthius,\
          the goatherd:\
          \'93Come now, Melanthius,\
          light a fire in the hall. Set beside it\
[220] a large chair with a fleece across it.                                                                        \
          And bring a hefty piece of fat\'97there\'92s some\
          inside the house\'97so the young men here\
          can warm the bow and rub grease into it,\
          then test the bow and end this contest.\'94                                                                           \
          \
          When he\'92d said this, Melanthius quickly lit\
          a tireless fire. Then he brought a large chair up,\
          draped a fleece on it, set it down beside the fire,\
          and from inside the house fetched a large piece of fat.\
          Then the young men warmed the bow and tested it.\
[230] But they couldn\'92t string it\'97whatever strength they had                   \
          was far too little. Antinous and godlike Eurymachus,\
          the suitors\'92 leaders, still remained\'97the two of them\
          with their abilities, were the finest men by far.\
          Now, the cattle herder and the keeper of the swine\
          belonging to godlike Odysseus had gone out,\
          both together, so lord Odysseus himself                                                                                        \
          walked from the house to follow after them. And then,\
          when they\'92d gone beyond the gates and courtyard,\
          he spoke, addressing them with reassuring words:\
[240] \'93You there, cattleman and swineherd, shall I                            \
          tell you something or keep it to myself?\
          My spirit tells me I should speak to you.\
          If Odysseus were to come back suddenly,\
          brought from somewhere by a god, would you two\
          be the sort of men who would defend him?\
          Would you support the suitors or Odysseus?\
          Answer as your heart and spirit prompt you.\'94\
          \
          Then the cattle herder answered him:\
          \'93O Father Zeus,                                                          \
          would that you might fulfill this very wish\'97\
[250] may that man come, and led on by some god.                                          \
          Then you would know the kind of strength I have\
          and how my hands can show my power.\'94\
          \
          And then Eumaeus, too, made the same sort of prayer\
          to all the gods that wise Odysseus would come back\
          to his own home. Once Odysseus had clearly seen\
          how firm their minds were, he spoke to them again,\
          saying these words:\
          \'93Well, here I am in person\'97\
          after suffering much misfortune, I\'92ve come home,\
          back in the twentieth year to my own land.\
[260] Of those who work for me, I recognize                                     \
          that you\'92re the only two who want me back.\
          Among the rest, I\'92ve heard no one praying                                                                   \
          that my return would bring me home again.\
          I\'92ll tell you both how this is going to end\'97\
          and I\'92ll speak the truth\'97if, on my behalf\
          some god will overcome those noble suitors,\
          I\'92ll bring you each a wife, and I\'92ll provide\
          possessions and a house built near my own.\
          Then you\'92ll be my companions\'97and kinsmen\
[270] of Telemachus. Come, I\'92ll show you something,                                       \
          a sure sign, so you will clearly know it\'92s me\
          and trust me in your hearts\'97here\'92s the old scar\
          I got from a boar\'92s white tusk, when I\'92d gone\
          to Parnassus with Autolycus\'92 sons.\'94                                                          \
          \
          As he said this, Odysseus pulled aside his rags,\
          exposing the great scar. Once those two had seen it\
          and noted every detail, they threw their arms\
          around the wise Odysseus, burst into tears,\
          and welcomed him, kissing his head and shoulders.\
[280] Odysseus did the same\'97he kissed their heads and hands.                         \
          They would have kept on crying until sunset,\
          if Odysseus himself hadn\'92t called a halt and said:\
          \'93Stop these laments. Let\'92s have no more crying.\
          Someone might come out from the hall, see us,\
          and tell the people in the house. Let\'92s go in,\
          one by one, not all together. I\'92ll go first.                                                                          \
          You come later. And let\'92s make this our sign.\
          All those other men, the noble suitors,\
          will not allow the quiver and the bow\
[290] to be given to me. But, good Eumaeus,                                                             \
          as you\'92re carrying that bow through the house,\
          put it in my hands, and tell the women\
          to lock their room\'97bolt the close-fitting doors.\
          If any of them hears the noise of men\
          groaning or being hit inside our walls,\
          she\'92s to stay quiet, working where she is,\
          and not run off outside. Now, as for you,                                                                       \
          good Philoetius, I want you to lock\
          the courtyard gates. Bolt and lash them shut.\
          Do it quickly.\'94\
          \
[300] After he\'92d said this,                                  \
          Odysseus went into the stately home and sat down\
          on the chair from which he\'92d risen. The two men,\
          godlike Odysseus\'92 servants, then went in as well.\
          Eurymachus already had the bow in hand,\
          warming it here and there in the firelight.\
          But even doing that, he could not string it.\
          Then his noble heart gave out a mighty groan,\
          and he spoke to them directly\'97he was angry.\
          \'93It\'92s too bad. I\'92m frustrated for myself\
[310] and for you all. I\'92m not that unhappy                                                \
          about the marriage, though I am upset.\
          There are many more Achaean women\'97\
          some here in sea-girt Ithaca itself,\
          others in different cities. But if we are\
          so weak compared to godlike Odysseus\
          that we can\'92t string his bow, it\'92s a disgrace\
          which men will learn about in years to come.\'94\
          \
          Antinous, Eupeithes\'92 son, then answered him:\
          \'93Eurymachus, that\'92s not going to happen.\
[320] You yourself know it. At this moment,                                                              \
          in the country there\'92s a feast day, sacred\
          to the god. So who would bend the bow? No,\
          set it to one side without saying anything.\
          As for the axes, what if we let them                                                                                       \
          just stand there. I don\'92t think anyone\
          will come into the home of Odysseus,\
          Laertes\'92 son, and carry them away.\
          So come, let the steward begin to pour\
          wine in the cups, so we can make libations.\
[330] Set the curved bow aside. In the morning,                                                     \
          tell Melanthius the goatherd to bring in\
          the finest goats by far from all the herds,\
          so we can set out pieces of the thigh\
          for Apollo, the famous archer god.\
          Then we\'92ll test the bow and end the contest.\'94\
          \
          Antinous finished. They were pleased with what he\'92d said.\
          Heralds poured water on their hands, and young men                                                  \
          filled the mixing bowls up to the brim with drink\
          and served them all, pouring a few drops in the cups\
[340] to start the ritual. Once they\'92d poured libations                               \
          and drunk wine to their heart\'92s content, Odysseus,\
          a crafty man who had a trick in mind, spoke out:\
          \'93Suitors of the splendid queen, listen to me,\
          so I can say what the heart inside my chest\
          is prompting me to state. It\'92s a request,\
          a plea, especially to Eurymachus\
          and godlike Antinous, since what he said\
          was most appropriate\'97that for the moment\
          you should stop this business with the bow\
[350] and turn the matter over to the gods.                                                                 \
          In the morning a god will give the strength                                                                  \
          to whoever he desires. But come now,\
          give me the polished bow, so here among you\
          I can test my power and arms and see\
          if I still have strength in my supple limbs\
          the way I used to have, or if my travels\
          and my lack of food have quite destroyed it.\'94\
          \
          Odysseus finished. They were all extremely angry,\
          afraid that he might string the polished bow.\
[360] Then Antinous, speaking to him directly,                                                                    \
          took Odysseus to task:\
          \'93You wretched stranger,\
          your mind lacks any sense\'97you\'92ve none at all.\
          Aren\'92t you content to share a feast with us,\
          such illustrious men, without being disturbed                                                             \
          or lacking any food, and then to hear\
          what we say to one another as we speak? \
          No other beggar or stranger listens in\
          on what we say. The wine, so honey sweet,\
          has injured you, as it harms other men,\
[370] when they gulp it down and drink too much.                                             \
          Wine befuddled even great Eurytion,\
          the centaur, in brave Perithous\'92 house,\
          when he\'92d gone to the Lapiths. Afterwards,\
          when his heart went blind from drinking wine,\
          in a mad fit he committed evil acts\
          in Perithous\'92 home. Grief seized the heroes.\
          They jumped up and hauled him out of doors,\
          through the gate, then cut off his ears and nose\
          with pitiless bronze. His wits were reckless,                                                                  \
[380] and he went on his way, bearing madness                                \
          in his foolish heart. And that\'92s the reason\
          the fight between centaurs and men began.\
          But he first discovered evil in himself,\
          when loaded down with wine.4 And so I say\
          if you string the bow, you\'92ll face great trouble.\
          You\'92ll not get gentle treatment anywhere,\
          not in this land. We\'92ll ship you off at once\
          in a black ship over to king Echetus, \
          who likes to kill and torture everyone.\
[390] You won\'92t escape from him. So drink your wine                      \
          in peace, and don\'92t compete with younger men.\'94                                                  \
          \
          Wise Penelope then answered him and said:\
          \'93Antinous, it\'92s neither good nor proper\
          to deny guests of Telemachus a chance,\
          no matter who it is comes to this house. \
          And if, trusting in his strength and power,\
          the stranger strings Odysseus\'92 great bow,\
          do you think he\'92ll take me to his home\
          and make me his wife? I\'92m sure he himself\
[400] carries no such hope in that chest of his.                                                          \
          So none of you should be at dinner here\
          with sorrow in his heart because of him.\
          That would be undignified.\'94\
          \
          Then Eurymachus,                                             \
          son of Polybus, answered her:\
          \'93Wise Penelope,\
          daughter of Icarius, we do not think\
          this man will take you home. That would be wrong.\
          But we would be ashamed by public gossip\
          from both men and women if later on\
          some low-born Achaean said something like\
[410] \'91Those men wooing the wife of that fine man                           \
          are far worse than him\'97they can\'92t even string\
          his polished bow, and yet another man,\
          a beggar who came here on his travels,\
          did so with ease and then shot through the iron.\'92\
          That\'92s what men will say, and it would be\
          a slur on us.\'94\
          \
          Then wise Penelope replied:                                                           \
          \'93Eurymachus, there is no way at all\
          there will be in this district good reports\
          of those dishonouring and eating up\
[420] a noble\'92s home. Why turn the matter now                               \
          into a slur? This stranger\'92s very large\
          and strongly built. Furthermore, he claims\
          he comes by birth from a good father.\
          So come now, give him the polished bow,\
          and let us see. I will say this to you\'97\
          and it will happen\'97if he strings the bow\
          and Apollo grants him glory, I\'92ll dress him\
          in some lovely clothes, a cloak and tunic,\
          and give him a sharp spear, as a defence                                                                         \
[430] from dogs and men, and a two-edged sword.                                             \
          I\'92ll give him sandals for his feet and send him\
          wherever his heart and spirit tell him.\'94\
          \
          Shrewd Telemachus then answered her:\
          \'93Mother,\
          among Achaeans, no man has a right\
          stronger than my own to give the bow\
          to anyone I wish or to withhold it\'97\
          none of those who rule in rocky Ithaca\
          or in the islands neighbouring Elis,\
          where horses graze. Among these men, no one\
[440] will deny my will by force, if I wish                                           \
          to give the bow, even to this stranger\
          as an outright gift to take away with him.\
          But you should go up to your own chamber                                                                 \
          and keep busy with your proper work,\
          the loom and spindle, and tell your women\
          to go about their tasks. The bow will be\
          a matter for the men, especially me,\
          since the power in this house is mine.\'94\
          \
          Penelope, astonished, went back to her rooms,\
[450] taking to heart the prudent words her son had said.                                         \
          With her servant women she walked up to her room\
          and then wept for Odysseus, her dear husband,\
          till bright-eyed Athena cast sweet sleep on her eyes.\
          The worthy swineherd had picked up the curving bow\
          and was carrying it. But all the suitors cried out                                                                    \
          in the hall. One of those arrogant young men\
          then said something like:\
          \'93What are you doing,\
          you wretched swineherd, carrying that bow,\
          you idiot? You\'92ll soon be with the swine\
[460] all alone, with no men around, being eaten                             \
          by those swift dogs you yourself have raised,\
          if Apollo and other immortal gods\
          act with graciousness to us.\'94\
          \
          That\'92s what they said.\
          So, though he was carrying the bow, he put it down,\
          afraid because inside the hall so many men \
          were yelling at him. But then from across the room\
          Telemachus shouted out a threat:\
          \'93Old man,\
          keep on moving up here with that bow. You\'92ll soon\
          regret obeying them all. I\'92m younger than you,                                                        \
[470] but I might force you out into the fields                                    \
          and throw rocks at you. I\'92m the stronger man.\
          I wish my hands had that much strength and power\
          over all the suitors in the house. I\'92d send\
          some of them soon enough on their way home,\
          out of this house, and they\'92d be miserable.\
          For they keep coming up with wicked plans.\'94\
          \
          Telemachus finished speaking. But the suitors\
          all had a hearty laugh at his expense, relaxing\
          their bitter anger at Telemachus. Meanwhile,\
[480] the swineherd kept on going through the hall,                                                       \
          carrying the bow. He came to shrewd Odysseus\
          and placed it in his hands. Then he called the nurse,                                                       \
          Eurycleia, and said to her:\
          \'93Wise Eurycleia,\
          Telemachus is telling you to lock up\
          the closely fitted doorway to this hall.\
          If anyone hears groans inside this room\
          or any noise from men within these walls,\
          she\'92s not to run out, but stay where she is,\
          carrying out her work in silence.\'945\
          \
[490] After he\'92d said this, her words could find no wings.                                          \
          So she locked the doors of that well-furnished hall.\
          And Philoetius, without a word, slipped outside\
          and locked the courtyard gates inside the sturdy walls.\
          A cable from a curved ship was lying there,                                                                               \
          under the portico, made of papyrus fibres.\
          With that he lashed the gates, then went inside,\
          sat down again on the seat where he\'92d got up,\
          and observed Odysseus, who already had the bow.\
          He was turning it this way and that, testing it\
[500] in different ways to see if, while its lord was gone,                                            \
          worms had nibbled on the horns. One of the men,\
          with a glance beside him, would say something like:\
           \'94This man knows bows\'97he must be an expert.\
          Either he has bows like this stored at home\
          or else he wants to make one. That\'92s why\
          he\'92s turning it around in all directions.\
          That beggar\'92s really skilled in devious tricks.\'94                                                             \
          \
          And then another of those arrogant young men\
          would make some further comment:\
          \'93Well, I hope \
[510] the chance that this brings him some benefit                            \
          matches his ability to string this bow.\'94\
          \
          That\'92s how the suitors talked. But shrewd Odysseus,\
          once he\'92d raised the bow and looked it over\
          on all sides, then\'97just as someone really skilled\
          at playing the lyre and singing has no trouble\
          when he loops a string around a brand-new peg,\
          tying the twisted sheep\'92s gut down at either end\'97\
          that\'92s how easily Odysseus strung that great bow.\
          Holding it in his right hand, he tried the string.                                                                    \
[520] It sang out, resonating like a swallow\'92s song,                                                           \
          beneath his touch. Grief overwhelmed the suitors.\
          The skin on all of them changed colour. And then Zeus\
          gave out a sign with a huge peal of thunder.\
          Lord Odysseus, who had endured so much, rejoiced\
          that crooked-minded Cronos\'92 son had sent an omen.\
          Then he picked up a swift arrow lying by itself\
          on the table there beside him\'97the other ones,\
          which those Achaeans soon would be familiar with\'97\
          were stored inside the hollow quiver. He set it\
[530] against the bow, on the bridge, pulled the notched arrow                \
          and the bow string back\'97still sitting in his seat\'97                                                             \
          and with a sure aim let the arrow fly. It did not miss,\
          not even a single top on all the axe heads.\
          The arrow, weighted with bronze, went straight through\
          and out the other end. And then Odysseus\
          called out to Telemachus:\
          \'93Telemachus, the stranger\
          sitting in your halls has not disgraced you.\
          I did not miss my aim or work too long\
          to string that bow. My strength is still intact,\
[540] in spite of all the suitors\'92 scornful gibes.                                                           \
          Now it\'92s time to get a dinner ready\
          for these Achaeans, while there\'92s still some light,\
          then entertain ourselves in different ways,\
          with singing and the lyre. These are things                                                                   \
          which should accompany a banquet.\'94\
          \
          As he spoke, he gave a signal with his eyebrows.\
          Telemachus, godlike Odysseus\'92 dear son,\
          cinched up his sword, closed his fist around a spear,\
          moved close beside his father, right by his seat,\
[550] and stood there, fully armed with glittering bronze.                                        }