{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf460
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural\qc

\f0\fs24 \cf0 BOOK TWENTY-TWO\
The Killing of the Suitors\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural
\cf0           \
[Odysseus stands in the doorway and shoots arrows at the suitors; he first kills Antinous; Eurymachus offers compensation for what the suitors have done; Odysseus kills him; Telemachus kills Amphinomus, then goes to fetch weapons from the storeroom; Melanthius reveals where the weapons are stored and gets some for the suitors; Eumaeus and Philoetius catch Melanthius and string him up to the rafters; Athena appears in the guise of Mentor to encourage Odysseus; Agelaus tries to rally the suitors; Odysseus, Telemachus, Eumaeus and Philoetius keep killing suitors until Athena makes the suitors panic; Leiodes seeks mercy from Odysseus but is killed; Odysseus spares Phemius and Medon; Odysseus questions Eurycleia about the women servants who have dishonoured him; he gets them to haul the bodies outside and clean up the hall; Telemachus hangs all the unfaithful female slaves; Melanthius is cut up and castrated; Odysseus purifies the house and yard; Odysseus is reunited with the faithful women servants]\
          \
          Then shrewd Odysseus stripped off his rags, grabbed up\
          the bow and quiver full of arrows, and sprang\
          over to the large doorway. He dumped swift arrows\
          right there at his feet and then addressed the suitors:\
          \
          \'93This competition to decide the issue\
          is now over. But there\'92s another target\'97\
          one no man has ever struck\'97I\'92ll find out\
          if I can hit it. May Apollo grant\
          I get the glory.\'94\
          \
          As Odysseus spoke, \
  [10] he aimed a bitter arrow straight at Antinous,                                                           \
          who was just about to raise up to his lips\
          a fine double-handled goblet he was holding                                                                           \
          in his hands, so he could drink some wine. In his heart\
          there was no thought of slaughter. Among those feasting,\
          who would ever think, in such a crowd of people, \
          one man, even with truly outstanding strength,\
          would risk confronting evil death, his own black fate?\
          Odysseus took aim and hit him with an arrow\
          in the throat. Its point passed through his tender neck.\
  [20] He slumped over on his side, and, as he was hit,                                                  \
          the cup fell from his hand. A thick spurt of human blood\
          came flowing quickly from his nose. Then, suddenly\
          he pushed the table from him with his foot, spilling                                                         \
          food onto the floor\'97the bread and roasted meat\
          were ruined. When the suitors saw Antinous fall,\
          they raised an uproar in the house, leaping from their seats,\
          scurrying in panic through the hall, looking round\
          everywhere along the well-constructed walls,\
          but there were no weapons anywhere, no strong spear\
  [30] or shield for them to seize. They began to shout,                                                \
          yelling words of anger at Odysseus:\
          \
          \'93Stranger,\
          you\'92ll pay for shooting arrows at this man.\
          For you there\'92ll be no contests any more.\
          It\'92s certain you\'92ll be killed once and for all.\
          You\'92ve killed a man, by far the finest youth\
          in all of Ithaca. And now the vultures                                                                                 \
          are going to eat you up right here.\'94\
          \
          Each of them\
          shouted out some words like these. They did not think\
          he\'92d killed the man on purpose. In their foolishness,\
  [40] they didn\'92t realize they\'92d all become caught up                                \
          in destruction\'92s snare. Shrewd Odysseus scowled at them\
          and gave his answer:\
          \
          \'93You dogs, because you thought\
          I\'92d not come back from Troy to my own home,\
          you\'92ve been ravaging my house, raping women,\
          and in your devious way wooing my wife,\
          while I was still alive, with no fear of gods\
          who hold wide heaven, or of any man                                                                               \
          who might take his revenge in days to come.\
          And now a fatal net has caught you all.\'94\
          \
  [50] As Odysseus said these words, pale fear seized everyone.                           \
          Each man looked around to see how he might flee\
          complete destruction. Only Eurymachus spoke\'97\
          he answered him and said:\
          \
          \'93If, in fact, it\'92s true\
          that you\'92re Odysseus of Ithaca,\
          back home again, you\'92re right in what you say\
          about the actions of Achaeans here, \
          their frequent reckless conduct in your home,\
          their many foolish actions in the fields.\
          But the man responsible for all this\
  [60] now lies dead\'97I mean Antinous, the one                                \
          who started all this business, not because                                                                       \
          he was all that eager to get married\'97\
          that\'92s not what he desired. No. For he had\
          another plan in mind, which Cronos\'92 son\
          did not bring to fulfillment. He wanted\
          to become the king of fertile Ithaca,\
          by ambushing your son and killing him.\
          Now he himself has died, as he deserved.\
          So at this point you spare your own people.\
  [70] Later on we\'92ll collect throughout the land                                 \
          repayment for all we\'92ve had to eat and drink\
          inside your halls, and every man will bring\
          compensation on his own, in an amount\
          worth twenty oxen, paying you back in gold\
          and bronze until your heart is mollified.\
          Until that time, no one is blaming you\
          for being so angry.\'94\
          \
          Shrewd Odysseus glared at him                                                  \
          and then replied:\
          \
          \'93Eurymachus, if you gave me\
          all the goods you got from your own fathers,\
  [80] everything which you now own, and added                              \
          other assets you could obtain elsewhere,\
          not even then would I hold back my hands\
          from slaughter, not until the suitors pay\
          for all their arrogance. Now you\'92ve a choice\'97\
          to fight here face to face or, if any man\
          wishes to evade his death and lethal fate,\
          to run away. But I don\'92t think there\'92s one\
          who will escape complete destruction.\'94\
          \
          Once Odysseus spoke, their knees and hearts went slack\
  [90] right where they stood. Then Eurymachus spoke once more,                  \
          calling out to them:\
          \
          \'93Friends, this man won\'92t hold in check                                                      \
          those all-conquering hands of his. Instead,\
          now he\'92s got the polished bow and quiver,\
          from that smooth threshold he\'92ll just shoot at us\
          until he\'92s killed us all. So let\'92s think now\
          about how we should fight. Pull out your swords,\
          and set tables up to block those arrows\'97\
          they bring on death so fast. And then let\'92s charge,\
          go at him all together in a group, \
[100] so we can dislodge him from the threshold,                                                  \
          clear the door, get down into the city,\
          and raise the alarm as swiftly as we can.\
          Then this man should soon take his final shot.\'94\
          \
          With these words, Eurymachus pulled out his sword,\
          a sharp two-edged blade of bronze, and then charged out                                        \
          straight at Odysseus, with a blood-curdling shout.\
          As he did so, lord Odysseus shot an arrow.\
          It struck him in the chest beside the nipple\
          and drove the swift shaft straight down into his liver.\
[110] Eurymachus\'92 sword fell from his hand onto the ground.                              \
          He bent double and then fell, writhing on the table,\
          knocking food and two-handled cups onto the floor.\
          His forehead kept hammering the earth, his heart\
          in agony, as both his feet kicked at the chair\
          and made it shake. A mist fell over both his eyes.\
          Then Amphinomus went at glorious Odysseus,\
          charging straight for him. He\'92d drawn out his sharp sword,                                      \
          to see if he would somehow yield the door to him.\
          But Telemachus moved in too quickly for him\'97\
[120] he threw a bronze-tipped spear and hit him from behind                \
          between the shoulders. He drove it through his chest.\
          With a crash, Amphinomus fell, and his forehead\
          struck hard against the ground. Telemachus jumped back,\
          leaving his spear in Amphinomus, afraid that,\
          if he tried to pull out the long-shadowed spear,\
          some Achaean might attack and stab him with a sword\
          or strike him while he was stooping down. And so\
          he quickly ran away and then moved across\
          to his dear father. Standing close to him, he spoke\'97                                                      \
          his words had wings:\
          \
[130] \'93Father, now I\'92ll bring you                          \
          a shield, two spears, and a bronze helmet,\
          one that fits your temples. When I get back,\
          I\'92ll arm myself and hand out other armour\
          to the swineherd and the keeper of the goats.\
          It\'92s better if we fully arm ourselves.\'94\
          \
          Quick-witted Odysseus answered him and said:\
          \
          \'93Get them here fast, while still I have arrows\
          to protect myself, in case they push me\
          from the doors, since I\'92m here by myself.\'94\
          \
[140] Odysseus spoke, and Telemachus obeyed                                        \
          his dear father. He went off to the storeroom\
          where their splendid weapons lay. From the place\
          he took four shields, eight spears, and four bronze helmets                                     \
          with thick horsehair plumes. He went out carrying these\
          and came back to his dear father very quickly.\
          First he armed himself with bronze around his body,\
          and the two servants did the same, putting on\
          the lovely armour. Then they took their places\
          on either side of skilled and sly Odysseus,\
[150] who, as long as he had arrows to protect him,                                                        \
          kept on aiming at the suitors in his house,\
          shooting at them one by one. As he hit them,\
          they fell down in heaps. But once he\'92d used his arrows,\
          the king could shoot no more. So he leaned the bow                                                      \
          against the doorpost of the well-constructed wall,\
          and let it stand beside the shining entrance way.\
          Then on his own he set across his shoulders\
          his four-layered shield, and on his powerful head\
          he placed a beautifully crafted helmet \
[160] with horsehair nodding ominously on top.                                                                 \
          Then he grabbed two heavy bronze-tipped spears.\
          \
          In that well-constructed wall there was a side door,\
          and close to the upper level of the threshold\
          into the sturdy hall the entrance to a passage,\
          shut off with close-fitting doors. So Odysseus\
          told the worthy swineherd to stand beside this door\
          and watch, for there was just one way of reaching it.1                                                     \
          Then Agelaus spoke, calling all the suitors:\
          \
          \'93Friends, can someone climb up to that side door\
[170] and tell the men to raise a quick alarm?                                                          \
          Then this man won\'92t be shooting any more.\'94\
          \
          But Melanthius the goatherd answered him and said:\
          \
          \'93It can\'92t be done, divinely raised Agelaus.\
          The fine gate to the yard is awfully near,\
          and the passage entrance hard to get through.2\
          One man could block the way for everyone,\
          if he were brave. But come, let me bring you\
          armour from the storeroom. You can put it on.\
          It\'92s in the house, I think\'97there\'92s nowhere else                                                         \
[180] Odysseus and his noble son could store                                    \
          their weapons.\'94\
          \
          Once goatherd Melanthius said this,\
          he climbed a flight of stairs inside the palace,\
          up to Odysseus\'92 storerooms. There he took twelve shields,\
          as many spears, as many helmets made of bronze\
          with bushy horsehair plumes. Once he\'92d made it back,\
          carrying the weapons, as quickly as he could\
          he gave them to the suitors. When Odysseus saw them\
          putting armour on and their hands brandishing \
          long spears, his knees and his fond heart went slack.\
[190] His task appeared enormous. He called out quickly                                 \
          to Telemachus\'97his words had wings:\
          \
          \'93Telemachus,\
          it seems one of the women in the house\
          is stirring up a nasty fight against us,\
          or perhaps Melanthius might be the one.\'94\
          \
           Shrewd Telemachus then said in reply:\
          \
          \'93Father, I bear the blame for this myself.\
          It\'92s no one else\'92s fault. I left it open\'97\
          the close-fitting door of that storage room.\
          One of them has keener eyes than I do. \
[200] Come, good Eumaeus, shut the storeroom door.                                     \
          And try to learn if one of the women\
          has done this, or if it\'92s Melanthius,\
          son of Dolius\'97I suspect it\'92s him.\'94\
          \
          While they were saying these things to one another,                                                       \
          Melanthius the goatherd went back once more\
          to carry more fine armour from the storeroom.\
          But the loyal swineherd saw him and spoke out,\
          saying a quick word to Odysseus, who was close by:\
          \
          \'93Resourceful Odysseus, Laertes son,\
[210] raised from Zeus, there\'92s that man again,                                                       \
          the wretch we think is visiting the storeroom.\
          Give me clear instructions\'97Should I kill him,\
          if I prove the stronger man, or should I\
          bring him to you here?\'97he can pay you back\
          for the many insolent acts he\'92s done,\
          all those schemes he\'92s thought up in your home.\'94\
          \
          Resourceful Odysseus then answered him and said:                                                         \
          \
          \'93These proud suitors Telemachus and I\
          will keep penned up here inside the hall,\
[220] no matter how ferociously they fight.                                                                  \
          You two twist Melanthius\'92 feet and arms\
          behind him, throw him in the storeroom,\
          then lash boards against his back. Tie the man\
          to a twisted rope and then hoist him up\
          the lofty pillar till he\'92s near the beams.\
          Let him stay alive a while and suffer\
          in agonizing pain.\'94\
          \
          As Odysseus said this,\
          they listened eagerly and then obeyed his words.\
          They moved off to the storeroom, without being seen\
[230] by the man inside. He was, as it turned out, searching                             \
          for weapons in a corner of the room. So then,\
          when Melanthius the goatherd was coming out\
          across the threshold, holding a lovely helmet\
          in one hand and in the other an old broad shield\
          covered in mould\'97one belonging to Laertes,\
          which he used to carry as a youthful warrior,\
          but which now was lying in storage, its seams\
          unraveling on the straps\'97the two men jumped out\
          and grabbed him. They dragged him inside by the hair,\
[240] threw him on the ground\'97the man was terrified\'97                         \
          and tied his feet and hands with heart-wrenching bonds.\
          They lashed them tight behind his back, as Odysseus,                                                    \
          Laertes\'92 royal son, who had endured so much,\
          had told them. They fixed a twisted rope to him,\
          yanked him up the lofty pillar, and raised him\
          near the roof beams. And then, swineherd Eumaeus,\
          you taunted him and said:\
          \
          \'93Now, Melanthius,\
          you can really keep watch all night long,\
          stretched out on a warm bed, as you deserve.\
[250] You won\'92t miss the golden throne of early Dawn,                                  \
          as she rises from the streams of Ocean\'97\
          the very hour you\'92ve been bringing goats here,\
          so the suitors can prepare their banquets\
          in these halls.\'94\
          \
          They left Melanthius there,                                    \
          tied up and hanging in bonds which would destroy him.\
          The two put on their armour, closed the shining door,\
          and made their way to wise and crafty Odysseus.\
          Filled with fighting spirit, they stood there, four of them\
          on the threshold, with many brave men in the hall.\
[260] Then Athena, Zeus\'92 daughter, came up to them,                                                  \
          looking just like Mentor and with his voice, as well.\
          Odysseus saw her and rejoiced. He cried:\
          \
          \'93Mentor,\
          help fight off disaster. Remember me,  \
          your dear comrade. I\'92ve done good things for you.\
          You\'92re my companion, someone my own age.\'94\
          \
          Odysseus said this, thinking Mentor was, in fact,                                                                \
          Athena, who incites armed men to action.\
          From across the hall the suitors yelled:\
          \
          \'93Mentor,\
          don\'92t let what Odysseus says convince you\
[270] to fight the suitors and to stand by him.                                                           \
          For this is how it will end up, I think,\
          when our will prevails. Once we\'92ve killed these men,\
          father and son, then you\'92ll be slaughtered, too, \
          for all the things you\'92re keen to bring out\
          here in the hall. You\'92re going to pay for it\
          with your own head. Once our swords have sliced\
          your strength from you, we\'92ll mix your property,                                                   \
          all the things you have inside your home\
          and in the fields, with what Odysseus owns.\
[280] We won\'92t allow your sons and daughters                                  \
          to live within your house or your dear wife \
          to move in Ithaca, not in the city.\'94\
          \
          After they said this, Athena in her heart\
          grew very angry, and she rebuked Odysseus\
          with heated words:\
          \
          \'93Odysseus, you no longer have\
          that firm spirit and force you once possessed\
          when for nine years you fought against the Trojans\
          over white-armed Helen, who was nobly born.\
          You never stopped. You slaughtered many men\
[290] in fearful combat. Through your stratagems                             \
          Priam\'92s city of broad streets was taken.                                                                            \
          So how come now, when you\'92ve come home\
          among your own possessions, you\'92re moaning\
          about acting bravely with these suitors?\
          Come on, my friend, stand here beside me, \
          see what I do, so you can understand\
          the quality of Mentor, Alcimus\'92 son,\
          when, surrounded by his enemies,\
          he repays men who\'92ve acted well for him.\'94\
          \
[300] Athena spoke. But she did not give him the strength                       \
          to win that fight decisively. She was still testing\
          the power and resolution of Odysseus\
          and his splendid son. So she flew up to the roof\
          inside the smoky hall, and sat there, taking on                                                                      \
          the appearance of a swallow.\
          \
          Meanwhile the suitors\
          were being driven into action by Agelaus,\
          Damastor\'92s son, by Eurynomus, Amphimedon,\
          Demoptolemus, Peisander, Polyctor\'92s son,\
          and clever Polybus. Among the suitors still alive\
[310] these were the finest men by far. Odysseus\'92 bow                             \
          and his swift arrows had destroyed the others.\
          Agelaus spoke to them, addressing everyone:\
          \
          \'93Friends, this man\'92s hands have been invincible,\
          but now they\'92ll stop. Mentor has moved away,\
          once he\'92d made some empty boast. And now,\
          they\'92re left alone before the outer gates.                                                                          \
          So don\'92t throw those long spears of yours at them,\
          not all at once. Come, you six men throw first,\
          to see if Zeus will let us strike Odysseus\
[320] and win the glory. Those others over there                               \
          will be no trouble after he\'92s collapsed.\'94\
          \
          Agelaus spoke, and in their eagerness\
          to follow what he\'92d said, they all hurled their spears. \
          But Athena made sure their spear throws missed the mark.\
          One man hit a door post in the well-built hall. \
          Another struck the closely fitted door. One ash spear,\
          weighted down with bronze, fell against the wall.\
          When they\'92d escaped the suitor\'92s spears, lord Odysseus,                                              \
          who\'92d been through so much, was the first to speak:\
          \
[330] \'93Friends, now I\'92ll give the word\'97let\'92s hurl our spears              \
          into that crowd of suitors trying to kill us,\
          adding to the harmful acts they did before.\'94\
          \
          Once Odysseus spoke, they all took steady aim,\
          then threw their pointed spears. Odysseus struck down\
          Demoptolemus, Telemachus hit Euryades,\
          the swineherd struck Elatus, and the cattle herder\
          killed Peisander. These men\'92s teeth chewed up the earth,\
          all of them together. The suitors then pulled back                                                              \
          into the inner section of the hall. The others\
[340] then rushed up to pull their spears out of the dead.                                          \
          The suitors kept throwing spears with frantic haste,\
          but, though there were many, Athena made them miss.\
          One man struck the door post of the well-built hall.\
          Another hit the closely fitted door. One ash spear,\
          weighted down with bronze, fell against the wall.\
          But Amphimedon did hit Telemachus\'92 hand\
          a glancing blow across the wrist. The bronze point\
          cut the surface of his skin. And with his long spear\
          Ctessipus grazed Eumaeus\'92 shoulder above his shield,\
[350] but the spear veered off and fell down on the ground.                                          \
          Then the group surrounding sly and shrewd Odysseus\
          once more threw sharp spears into the crowd of suitors,\
          and once again Odysseus, sacker of cities,\
          hit a man\'97Eurydamas\'97while Telemachus\
          struck Amphimedon, and swineherd Eumaeus\
          hit Polybus. The cattle herder Philoetius\
          then struck Ctesippus in the chest and boasted\
          above the body, saying: \
          \
          \'93Son of Polytherses,\
          you love to jeer\'97but don\'92t yield any more\
[360] to your stupidity and talk so big.                                                                              \
          Leave that sort of boasting to the gods,\
          for they are far more powerful than you.\
          This is your guest gift\'97something to pay back                                                          \
          the ox hoof you gave godlike Odysseus\
          back when he was begging in the house.\'94\
          \
          That\'92s what the herder of the bent-horned cattle said.\
          At close range Odysseus wounded Damastor\'92s son\
          with his long spear, and Telemachus injured\
          Leocritus, son of Evenor\'97he struck him\
[370] with his spear right in the groin and drove the bronze                     \
          straight through\'97so Leocritus fell on his face,\
          his whole forehead smashing down onto the ground.\
          Then Athena held up her man-destroying aegis\
          from high up in the roof.3 The suitors\'92 minds panicked,\
          and they fled through the hall, like a herd of cattle\
          when a stinging gadfly goads them to stampede,                                                                 \
          in spring season, when the long days come. Just as\
          the falcons with hooked talons and curved beaks\
          fly down from mountains, chasing birds and driving them\
[380] well below the clouds, as they swoop along the plain,                                     \
          and then pounce and kill them, for there\'92s no defence,\
          no flying away, while men get pleasure from the chase,\
          that\'92s how Odysseus and his men pursued the suitors\
          and struck them down, one by one, throughout the hall.\
          As they smashed their heads in, dreadful groans arose,\
          and the whole floor was awash in blood.\
          \
          But then,                                                                          \
          Leiodes ran out, grabbed Odysseus\'92 knees,\
          and begged him\'97his words had wings:\
          \
          \'93Odysseus,\
          I implore you at your knees\'97respect me\
[390] and have pity. I tell you I\'92ve never                                            \
          harmed a single woman in these halls\
          by saying or doing something reckless.\
          Instead I tried to stop the other suitors\
          when they did those things. They didn\'92t listen\
          or restrain their hands from acting badly.\
          So their own wickedness now brings about\
          their wretched fate. Among them I\'92m a prophet\
          who has done no wrong, and yet I\'92ll lie dead,\
          since there\'92s no future thanks for one\'92s good deeds.\'94\
          \
          Shrewd Odysseus glared at him and answered:                                                                      \
          \
[400] \'93If, in fact,                                             \
          you claim to be a prophet with these men,\
          no doubt here in these halls you\'92ve often prayed\
          that my goal of a sweet return would stay\
          remote from me, so my dear wife could go\
          away with you and bear your children. \
          That\'92s why you won\'92t escape a bitter death.\'94\
          \
          As he said this, Odysseus picked up in his fist\
          a sword that lay near by\'97Agelaus, when he was killed,\
          had let it fall onto the ground. With this sword\
[410] Odysseus struck Leiodes right on the neck\'97                                   \
          his head rolled in the dust as he was speaking.\
          \
          And then the minstrel Phemius, son of Terpes,                                                                     \
          who\'92d been compelled to sing before the suitors,\
          kept trying to get away from his own murky fate.\
          He stood holding his clear-toned lyre by the side door,\
          his mind divided\'97should he slip out from the hall\
          and take a seat close to the altar of great Zeus,\
          god of the courtyard, where Laertes and Odysseus\
          had burned many thighs from sacrificial oxen,\
[420] or should he rush up to Odysseus\'92 knee                                            \
          and beg him for his life. As his mind thought it through,\
          the latter course of action seemed the better choice,\
          to clasp the knees of Laertes\'92 son, Odysseus.\
          So he set the hollow lyre down on the ground,                                                                      \
          between the mixing bowl and silver-studded chair,\
          rushed out in person to clasp Odysseus\'92 knees,\
          and pleaded with him\'97his words had wings:\
          \
          \'93I implore you, Odysseus, show me respect\
          and pity. There\'92ll be sorrow for you later,\
[430] if you kill me, a minstrel, for I sing                                           \
          to gods and men. I am self taught. The god\
          has planted in my heart all kinds of songs,\
          and I\'92m good enough to sing before you,\
          as to a god. Don\'92t be too eager then\
          to cut my throat. Your dear son Telemachus                                                               \
          could tell you that it wasn\'92t my desire\
          nor did I need to spend time at your house,\
          singing for the suitors at their banquets.\
          But their greater power and numbers\
          brought me here by force.\'94\
          \
[440] As Phemius said this,                                                        \
          royal Telemachus heard him and spoke up,\
          calling to his father, who was close by:\
          \
          \'93Hold on. Don\'92t let your sword injure this man.\
          He\'92s innocent. We should save Medon, too,\
          the herald, who always looked out for me\
          inside the house when I was still a child,\
          unless Philoetius has killed him,\
          or the swineherd, or he ran into you\
          as you were on the rampage in the hall.\'94                                                                         \
          \
[450] Telemachus spoke. Medon, whose mind was clever,                                        \
          heard him, for he was cowering underneath a chair,\
          his skin covered by a new-flayed ox-hide, trying\
          to escape his own black fate. He quickly  jumped out\
          from beneath the chair, threw off the ox-hide,\
          rushed up to clasp Telemachus\'92 knees, and begged\'97\
          his words had wings:\
          \
          \'93Here I am, my friend.\
          Stop!  And tell your father to restrain himself,\
          in case, as he exults in his great power,\
          he slaughters me with that sharp bronze of his,\
[460] in his fury with the suitors, those men                                      \
          who consumed his goods here in his own hall,                                                          \
          those fools who did not honour you at all.\'94                \
          \
          Resourceful Odysseus then smiled at him and said:\
          \
          \'93Cheer up!  This man here has saved your life.\
          He\'92s rescued you, so you know in your heart\
          and can tell someone else how doing good\
          is preferable by far to acting badly.\
          But move out of the hall and sit outside,\
          in the yard, some distance from the killing,\
[470] you and the minstrel with so many songs,                                                     \
          until I finish all I need to do in here.\'94\
          \
          After Odysseus spoke, the two men went away,\
          outside the hall, and sat down there, by the altar\
          of great Zeus, peering round in all directions,                                                                         \
          always thinking they\'92d be killed.\
          \
          Odysseus, too,\
          looked round the house to check if anyone\
          was hiding there, still alive, trying to escape\
          his own dark fate. But every man he looked at\'97\
          and there were many\'97had fallen in blood and dust,\
[480] like fish which, in the meshes of a net, fishermen                            \
          have pulled from the gray sea up on the curving beach,\
          lying piled up on the sand, longing for sea waves,\
          while the bright sun takes away their life\'97that\'92s how\
          the suitors then were lying in heaps on one another.\
          \
          Resourceful Odysseus then said to Telemachus:                                                                    \
          \
          \'93Telemachus, go and call the nurse in here,\
          Eurycleia, so I can speak to her.\
          Something\'92s on my mind\'97I want to tell her.\'94\
          \
          Once Odysseus spoke, Telemachus obeyed\
[490] what his dear father said. He shook the door and called                  \
          to Eurycleia, saying:4\
          \
          \'93Get up, old woman,\
          born so long ago\'97the one in charge\
          of female servants in the palace.\
          Come out. My father\'92s calling for you.\
          He\'92s got something he wants to say.\'94\
          \
          He spoke. But Eurycleia\'92s words could find no wings.\
          She opened up the door of the well-furnished hall\
          and came out. Telemachus went first and led the way.                                                  \
          There she found Odysseus with the bodies of the dead,\
[500] spattered with blood and gore, like a lion moving off                      \
          from feeding on a farmyard ox, his whole chest\
          and both sides of his muzzle caked with blood,\
          a terrifying sight, that\'92s how Odysseus looked,\
          with bloodstained feet and upper arms. Eurycleia,\
          once she saw the bodies and huge amounts of blood,\
          was ready to cry out for joy now that she\'92d seen\
          such a mighty act. But Odysseus held her back \
          and checked her eagerness. He spoke to her\'97                                                                      \
          his words had wings:\
          \
          \'93Old woman, you can rejoice\
[510] in your own heart\'97but don\'92t cry out aloud.                                                \
          Restrain yourself.  For it\'92s a sacrilege \
          to boast above the bodies of the slain.\
          Divine Fate and their own reckless actions\
          have killed these men, who failed to honour\
          any man on earth who came among them,\
          bad or good. And so through their depravity\
          they\'92ve met an evil fate. But come now,\
          tell me about the women in these halls,\
          the ones who disrespect me and the ones\
          who bear no blame.\'94\
          \
[520] His dear nurse Eurycleia                       \
          then answered him and said:\
          \
          \'93All right my child,                                                        \
          I\'92ll tell you the truth. In these halls of yours,\
          there are fifty female servants, women\
          we have taught to carry out their work,\
          to comb out wool and bear their slavery.\
          Of these, twelve in all have gone along\
          without a sense of shame and no respect\
          for me or even for Penelope herself.\
          Telemachus has only just grown up,\
[530] and his mother hasn\'92t let him yet control                                 \
          our female servants. But come, let\'92s go now\
          to that bright upstairs room and tell your wife. \
          Some god has made her sleep.\'94\
          \
          Resourceful Odysseus                                                  \
          then answered her and said:\
          \
          \'93Don\'92t wake her up.\
          Not yet. Those women who before all this\
          behaved so badly, tell them to come here.\'94\
          \
          Once he\'92d said this, the old woman went through the house\
          to tell the women the news and urge them to appear.\
          Odysseus then called Telemachus to him,\
[540] together with Eumaeus and Philoetius.                                                                           \
          He spoke to them\'97his words had wings:\
          \
          \'93Start carrying those corpses outside now,\
          and then take charge of the servant women.\
          Have these splendid chairs and tables cleaned,\
          wiped with porous sponges soaked in water.\
          Once you\'92ve put the entire house in order,                                                                   \
          then take those servants from the well-built hall\
          to a spot outside between the round house\
          and the sturdy courtyard wall and kill them.\
[550] Slash them with long swords, until the life is gone                    \
          from all of them, and they\'92ve forgotten\
          Aphrodite and how they loved the suitors\
          when they had sex with them in secret.\'94\
          \
          Odysseus spoke. Then the crowd of women came,\
          wailing plaintively and shedding many tears.\
          First they gathered up the corpses of the dead\
          and laid them out underneath the portico,\
          leaning them against each other in the well-fenced yard.                                           \
          Odysseus himself gave them their instructions               \
[560] and hurried on the work. The women were compelled                    \
          to carry out the dead. After that, they cleaned\
          the splendid chairs and tables, wiping them down\
          with water and porous sponges. Telemachus,\
          along with Philoetius and Eumaeus,\
          with shovels scraped the floor inside the well-built hall,\
          and women took the dirt and threw it in the yard.\
          When they\'92d put the entire hall in order,\
          they led the women out of the sturdy house\
          to a place between the round house and fine wall\
[570] round the courtyard, herding them into a narrow space                          \
          where there was no way to escape. Shrewd Telemachus\
          began by speaking to the other two:\
          \
          \'93I don\'92t want\
          to take these women\'92s lives with a clean death.\
          They\'92ve poured insults on my head, on my mother,\
          and were always sleeping with the suitors.\'94\
          \
          He spoke, then tied the cable of a dark-prowed ship\
          to a large pillar, threw one end above the round house,\
          then pulled it taut and high, so no woman\'92s foot \
          could reach the ground. Just as doves or long-winged thrushes\
[580] charge into a snare set in a thicket, as they seek out                        \
          their roosting place, and find out they\'92ve been welcomed                                          \
          by a dreadful bed, that\'92s how those women held their heads\
          all in a row, with nooses fixed around their necks,\
          so they\'92d have a pitiful death. For a little while\
          they twitched their feet, but that did not last long.\
          \
          Then they brought Melanthius out through the doorway\
          into the yard. With pitiless bronze they sliced away\
          his nose and ears, then ripped off his cock and balls\
          as raw meat for dogs to eat, and in their rage\
[590] hacked off his hands and feet. After they\'92d done that,                                    \
          they washed their hands and feet and went inside the house,\
          back to Odysseus. Their work was done. But he                                                                   \
          called out to Eurycleia, his dear nurse:\
          \
          \'93Old woman,\
          bring sulphur here to purify the house.\
          And bring me fire so I can purge the hall.\
          Ask Penelope to come here with her slaves,\
          and get all the women in the house to come.\'94\
          \
          His dear nurse Eurycleia answered him:\
          \
          \'93My child,\
          what you say is all well and good, but come,\
[600] I\'92ll fetch you clothing, a cloak and tunic,                                                         \
          so you don\'92t stand like this in your own hall\
          with nothing but rags on your wide shoulders.\
          That would be the cause of some disgrace.\'94\
          \
          Resourceful Odysseus then answered her and said:                                                           \
          \
          \'93But first make me a fire in the hall.\'94\
          \
          Dear nurse Eurycleia then followed what he\'92d said.\
          She brought fire and sulphur, so Odysseus\
          purged the house and yard completely. Eurycleia\
          went back through Odysseus\'92 splendid home to tell\
[610] the women what had happened and to order them                          \
          to reappear. They came out holding torches,\
          then gathered round Odysseus, embracing him.\
          They clasped and kissed his head, his hands, and shoulders,\
          in loving welcome. A sweet longing seized him                                                                   \
          to sigh and weep, for in his heart he knew them all.\
          \
}