{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf460
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural\qc

\f0\fs24 \cf0 BOOK TWENTY-THREE\
Odysseus and Penelope\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural
\cf0           \
[Eurycleia wakes up Penelope to tell her Odysseus has returned and killed the Suitors; Penelope refuses to believe the news; Penelope comes down and sits in the same room as Odysseus but doesn\'92t recognize him; Telemachus criticizes his mother; Odysseus invites her to test him and discusses with Telemachus what their next step will be to deal with the aftermath of the killings; they organize a fake wedding dance to deceive anyone passing the house; Odysseus is given a bath, and Athena transforms his appearance; Penelope tells Eurycleia to set his old bed up for him outside the bedroom; Odysseus tells the story of the bed; Penelope acknowledges Odysseus and embraces him; Odysseus tells her of the ordeals yet to come, according to the prophecy of Teiresias; Penelope and Odysseus go to bed, make love, and then she hears the story of his adventures; in the morning Odysseus gets up, tells Penelope to stay in her upper rooms, puts on his armour, instructs Eumaeus and Philoetius to arm themselves; Athena leads them out of the city]\
          \
          Old Eurycleia went up to an upstairs room,\
          laughing to herself, to inform her mistress\
          her beloved husband was inside the house.\
          Her knees moved quickly as her feet hurried on.\
          She stood beside her lady\'92s head and spoke to her:\
          \'93Wake up, Penelope, my dear child,\
          so you yourself can see with your own eyes\
          what you\'92ve been wanting each and every day.\
          Odysseus has arrived. He may be late,\
  [10] but he\'92s back in the house. And he\'92s killed                                \
          those arrogant suitors who upset this home,\
          used up his goods, and victimized his son.\'94\
          \
          Wise Penelope then answered her:                                                                                                   \
          \'93Dear nurse,\
          the gods have made you mad. They can do that\'97\
          turn even someone really sensible \
          into a fool and bring the feeble minded\
          to a path of fuller understanding.\
          They\'92ve injured you\'97your mind was sound before.\
          Why mock me, when my heart is full of grief,\
  [20] telling this mad tale, rousing me from sleep,                                               \
          a sweet sleep binding me, shrouding my eyes?\
          I\'92ve not had a sleep like that since Odysseus\
          went off to look at wicked Ilion,\
          a place whose name no one should ever speak.\
          Come now, go back down to the women\'92s hall.                                                       \
          Among my servants, if some other one\
          had come to tell me this, woken me up\
          when I was sleeping, I\'92d have sent her back\
          at once to the woman\'92s quarters in disgrace.\
  [30] But I\'92ll be good to you because you\'92re old.\'94                                                   \
          \
          The dear nurse Eurycleia then said to her:\
          \'93But I\'92m not making fun of you, dear child.\
          It\'92s true. Odysseus has returned. He\'92s back,\
          here in the house, exactly as I said.\
          He\'92s that stranger all the men dishonoured\
          in the hall. For some time Telemachus\
          knew he was at home, but he was careful                                                                      \
          to conceal his father\'92s plans, until the time\
          he could pay back those overbearing men\
          for their forceful oppression.\'94\
          \
  [40] Eurycleia spoke.                                                    \
          Penelope rejoiced. She jumped up out of bed,\
          hugged the old woman, tears falling from her eyelids,\
          then she spoke to her\'97her words had wings:\
          \'93Come now,\
          dear nurse, tell me the truth. If he\'92s really here,\
          back home as you claim, then how could he \
          turn his hands against those shameless suitors?\
          He was alone, and in this house those men\
          were always in a group.\'94\
          \
          Her dear nurse Eurycleia\
          then answered her:\
          \'93I didn\'92t see or hear about it.                                                          \
  [50] I only heard the groans of men being killed.                                               \
          We sat in our well-built women\'92s quarters,\
          in a corner, terrified. Close-fitting doors\
          kept us in there, until Telemachus,\
          your son, called me from the room. His father\
          had sent him there to summon me. And then,\
          I found Odysseus standing with the bodies\'97\
          dead men on the hard earth all around him,\
          lying on each other, a heart-warming sight\'97\
          and he was there, covered with blood and gore,\
  [60] just like a lion. Now all those bodies                                         \
          have been piled up at the courtyard gates,\
          and he\'92s purging his fair home with sulphur.                                                              \
          He\'92s kindled a great fire. He sent me out\
          to summon you. Now, come along with me,\
          so you two can be happy in your hearts.\
          You\'92ve been through so much misfortune, and now\
          what you\'92ve been looking forward to so long\
          has come about at last. He\'92s come himself,\
          to his own hearth while still alive\'97he\'92s found\
  [70] you and your son inside these halls and taken                          \
          his revenge on all suitors in his home,\
          men who acted harmfully against him.\'94 \
          \
          Wise Penelope then answered Eurycleia:\
          \'93Dear nurse, don\'92t laugh at them and boast too much.\
          You know how his appearance in the hall                                                                      \
          would please everyone, especially me\
          and the son born from the two of us.\
          But this story can\'92t be true, not the way\
          you\'92ve told it. One of the immortal gods\
  [80] has killed the noble suitors out of rage                                     \
          at their heart-rending pride and wicked acts.\
          There was no man on this earth they honoured,\
          bad or good, when he came into their group.\
          They\'92ve met disaster through their foolishness.\
          But in some place far away Odysseus\
          has forfeited his journey to Achaea,\
          and he himself is lost.\'94\
          \
          Dear nurse Eurycleia \
          then answered her:\
          \'93My child, what kind of speech has slipped                                     \
          the barrier of your teeth, when you declared\
  [90] your husband won\'92t get home\'97he\'92s in the house,                                 \
          at his own hearth. Your heart just has no trust.\
          But come on, I\'92ll tell you something else\'97\
          it\'92s a clear proof\'97that scar a boar gave him\
          some time ago with its white tusk. I saw it.\
          I washed it clean. I was going to tell you,\
          but his hand gripped me by the throat\'97his heart\
          in its great subtlety wouldn\'92t let me speak.\
          But come with me. I\'92ll stake my life on it.\
          If I\'92ve deceived you, then you can kill me\
          and choose a painful death.\'94\
          \
[100] Wise Penelope                                    \
          then answered her:\
          \'93Dear nurse, you find it hard\
          to grasp the plans of the eternal gods,\
          even though you\'92re really shrewd. But let\'92s go\
          to my son, so I can see the suitors\
          now they\'92re dead\'97and the man who killed them.\'94\
          \
          Penelope spoke, then went down from the upper room,\
          her heart turning over many things\'97Should she\
          keep her distance and question her dear husband,\
          or should she come up to him, hold his head and hands,\
[110] and kiss them? Crossing the stone threshold, she went in                \
          and sat down in the firelight opposite Odysseus,\
          beside the further wall. He was sitting there                                                                            \
          by a tall pillar, looking at the ground, waiting\
          to learn if his noble wife would speak to him\
          when her own eyes caught sight of him. She sat there\
          a long time in silence. Amazement came in her heart\'97\
          sometimes her eyes gazed at him full in the face,\
          but other times she failed to recognize him,\
          he had such shabby clothing covering his body.\
[120] Telemachus spoke up, addressing a rebuke                                      \
          directly to her:\
          \'93Mother, you\'92re a cruel woman,\
          with an unfeeling heart. Why turn aside\
          from my father in this way? Why not sit\
          over there, close to him, ask him questions?\
          No other woman\'92s heart would be so hard                                                                    \
          to make her keep her distance from a husband\
          who\'92s come home to her in his native land\
          in the twentieth year, after going through\
          so many harsh ordeals. That heart of yours  \
          is always harder than a stone.\'94\
          \
[130] Wise Penelope                         \
          then answered him:\
          \'93My child, inside my chest\
          my heart is quite amazed. I cannot speak\
          or ask questions, or look directly at him.\
          If indeed it\'92s true he is Odysseus\
          and is home again, surely the two of us\
          have more certain ways to know each other.\
          We have signs only we two understand.                                                                          \
          Other people will not recognize them.\'94\
          \
          As she spoke, lord Odysseus, who\'92d been through so much,\
[140] smiled and immediately spoke to Telemachus\'97                              \
          his words had wings:\
          \'93Telemachus, let your mother\
          test me in these halls. She will soon possess\
          more certain knowledge. Right now I\'92m filthy,\
          with disgusting clothing on my body. \
          That\'92s why she rejects me and will not say\
          I am Odysseus. But we need to think\
          how this matter can best resolve itself.\
          Anyone who murders just one person\
          in the district, even when the dead man\
[150] does not leave many to avenge him later,                                                      \
          goes into exile, leaving his relatives                                                                                     \
          and his native land. But we have slaughtered\
          the city\'92s main defence, the best by far\
          of the young men in Ithaca. I think\
          you should consider what that means.\'94\
          \
          Shrewd Telemachus then answered him and said:\
          \'93Surely you must look into this yourself,\
          dear father. For among all men, they say,\
          your planning is the best\'97of mortal men\
[160] no one can rival you. And as for us,                                                                     \
          we\'92re keen to follow you, and I don\'92t think\
          we\'92ll lack the bravery to match our strength.\'94\
          \
          Resourceful Odysseus said this in reply:\
          \'93All right, I\'92ll say what seems to me the best.                                                              \
          First of all, take a bath. Put tunics on.\
          Next, tell the female servants in the hall\
          to change their clothing. After that, we\'92ll let\
          the holy minstrel, with his clear-toned lyre,\
          lead us in playful dancing, so anyone\
[170] who hears us from outside\'97someone walking                         \
          down the road or those who live close by\'97\
          will say it is a wedding. In that way,\
          the wide rumour of the suitors\'92 murder\
          will not spread too soon down in the city,\
          before we go out to our forest lands.\
          There later on we\'92ll think of our next move,\
          whatever the Olympian god suggests.\'94                                                                              \
          \
          They listened eagerly to what Odysseus said\
          and were persuaded. So first of all they bathed\
[180] and put on tunics. The women got dressed up.                                \
          Then the godlike singer took his hollow lyre\
          and encouraged their desire for lovely songs\
          and noble dancing. The whole great house resounded\
          to the steps of men celebrating a good time\
          with women wearing lovely gowns. So any man\
          who listened in as he walked past outside the house\
          might offer a remark like this:\
          \'93It seems that someone\
          has married the queen with all those suitors.\
          A heartless woman. She lacked the courage                                                                 \
[190] to maintain her wedded husband\'92s home                                 \
          and persevere till he arrived back home.\'94\
          \
          That\'92s what someone would\'92ve said\'97he\'92d never know\
          what was going on. Meanwhile, Eurynome,\
          the housekeeper, gave brave Odysseus a bath,\
          rubbed him with oil, and put a tunic on him,\
          a fine cloak, as well. Athena poured beauty on him,\
          large amounts to make him taller, more robust\
          to look at, and on his head she made his hair\
          flow in curls resembling a hyacinth in bloom.\
[200] Just as a man sets a layer of gold on silver,                                                                \
          a skillful artisan whom Pallas Athena                                                                                             \
          and Hephaestus have taught all sorts of crafts,\
          so he produces marvelous work, that\'92s how Athena\
          poured grace onto his head and shoulders, as he came\
          out of his bath, looking like the immortal gods.\
          He sat back down in the chair from which he\'92d risen,\
          opposite his wife, and said to her:\
          \'93Strange lady,\
          to you those who live on Mount Olympus\
          have given, more so than to other women,\
[210] an unfeeling heart. No other woman                                        \
          would harden herself and keep her distance\
          from her husband, who, in the twentieth year,\
          came back to her in his own native land,                                                                       \
          after going through so much misfortune.\
          So come, nurse, spread out a bed for me,\
          so I can lie down by myself. The heart\
          inside her breast is made of iron.\'94\
          \
          Wise Penelope then answered him:\
          \'93Strange man,\
          I am not making too much of myself,\
[220] or ignoring you. Nor is it the case                                             \
          that I\'92m particularly offended.\
          I know well the sort of man you were\
          when you left Ithaca in your long-oared ship.\
          So come, Eurycleia, set up for him\
          outside the well-built bedroom that strong bed\
          he made himself. Put that sturdy bedstead\
          out there for him and throw some bedding on,\
          fleeces, cloaks, and shining coverlets.\'94                                                                              \
          \
          Penelope said this to test her husband.\
[230] But Odysseus, angry at his true-hearted wife,                                                          \
          spoke out:\
          \'93Woman, those words you\'92ve just uttered\
          are very painful. Who\'92s shifted my bed\
          to some other place? That would be difficult,\
          even for someone really skilled, unless\
          a god came down in person\'97for he could, \
          if he wished, set it elsewhere easily.\
          But among men there is no one living,\
          no matter how much energy he has,\
          who would find it easy to shift that bed.\
[240] For built into the well-constructed bedstead                             \
          is a great symbol which  I made myself\
          with no one else. A long-leaved olive bush                                                                   \
          was growing in the yard. It was in bloom\
          and flourishing\'97it looked like a pillar.\
          I built my bedroom round this olive bush,\
          till I had finished it with well-set stones.\
          I put a good roof over it, then added  \
          closely fitted jointed doors. After that,\
          I cut back the foliage, by removing\
[250] branches from the long-leaved olive bush.                                                    \
          I trimmed the trunk off, upward from the root,\
          cutting it skillfully and well with bronze,\
          so it followed a straight line. Once I\'92d made\
          the bedpost, I used an augur to bore out\
          the entire piece. That was how I started.\
          Then I carved out my bed, till I was done.\
          In it I set an inlay made of gold,                                                                                              \
          silver, and ivory, and then across it\
          I stretched a bright purple thong of ox-hide.\
[260] And that\'92s the symbol I describe for you.                                                         \
          But, lady, I don\'92t know if that bed of mine\
          is still in place or if some other man\
          has cut that olive tree down at its base\
          and set the bed up in a different spot.\'94\
          \
          Odysseus spoke, and sitting there, Penelope\
          went weak at the knees, and her heart grew soft.\
          For she recognized that it was true\'97that symbol\
          Odysseus had described to her. Eyes full of tears,\
          she ran to him, threw her arms around his neck,\
          kissed his head, and said:\
[270] \'93Don\'92t be angry, Odysseus,                                                       \
          not with me. In all other matters\
          you\'92ve been the cleverest of men. The gods                                                                \
          have brought us sorrows\'97they were not willing\
          the two of us should stay beside each other\
          to enjoy our youth and reach together\
          the threshold of old age. Now\'92s not the time\
          to rage at me, resenting what I\'92ve done\
          because I didn\'92t welcome you this way\
          when I first saw you. But in my dear breast\
[280] my heart was always fearful, just in case                                   \
          some other man would come and trick me\
          with his stories. For there are many men\
          who dream up wicked schemes. Argive Helen,\
          a child of Zeus, would never have had sex\
          with a man who came from somewhere else,\
          if she\'92d known Achaea\'92s warrior sons                                                                                 \
          would bring her back to her dear native land.\
          And some god drove her to that shameful act.\
          Not till that time did she start harbouring\
[290] within her heart the disastrous folly                                          \
          which made sorrow come to us as well.\
          But now you\'92ve mentioned that clear symbol,\
          our bed, which no one else has ever seen,\
          other than the two of us, you and me,\
          and a single servant woman, Actoris,\
          whom my father gave me when I came here.\
          For both of us she kept watch at the doors\
          of our strong bedroom. You\'92ve now won my heart,                                            \
          though it\'92s been truly stubborn.\'94\
          \
          Penelope spoke,\
[300] and stirred in him an even more intense desire                               \
          to weep. As he held his loyal and loving wife,\
          he cried. Just as it\'92s a welcome sight for swimmers\
          when land appears, men whose well-constructed ship \
          Poseidon has demolished on the sea, as winds\
          and surging waves were driving it, and a few men\
          have swum to shore, escaping the grey sea,\
          their bodies thickly caked with brine, and they climb\
          gladly up on land, evading that disaster,\
          that how Penelope rejoiced to see her husband.\
[310] She simply couldn\'92t stop her white arms holding him                               \
          around the neck. And rose-fingered early Dawn\
          would\'92ve appeared with them still weeping there,\
          if goddess Athena with the gleaming eyes,\
          had not thought of something else\'97she prolonged\
          the lengthy night as it came to an end, keeping\
          Dawn and her golden throne waiting by Ocean\'92s stream\'97\
          she would not let her harness her swift horses,\
          who carry light to men, Lampros and Phaeton,\
          the colts who bring on Dawn.\
          Resourceful Odysseus\
          then said to his wife:\
[320] \'93Lady, we\'92ve not yet come                           \
          to the end of all our trials. Countless tasks\
          must still be carried out in days to come,\
          plenty of hard work I have to finish.                                                                                   \
          That\'92s what the spirit of Teiresias\
          prophesied to me when I descended\
          inside Hades\'92 house to ask some questions\
          concerning our return, my companions\
          and myself. But come, wife, let\'92s go to bed,\
          so we can lie down and enjoy sweet sleep.\'94\
          \
          Wise Penelope then answered him:\
[330] \'93You\'92ll have a bed                                  \
          when your heart so desires, for the gods\
          have seen to it that you\'92ve returned back here\
          to your well-built home and native land.\
          But since you\'92ve thought of it and some god                                                               \
          has set it in your heart, come and tell me\
          of this trial. For I think I\'92ll hear of it\
          in future, so to learn of it right now\
          won\'92t make things any worse.\'94\
          \
          Resourceful Odysseus\
          then answered her and said:\
          \'93Strange lady,\
[340] why urge me so eagerly to tell you?                                                                      \
          All right, I\'92ll say it, and I\'92ll hide nothing.\
          But your heart will not find it delightful.\
          I myself get no enjoyment from it.\
          Teiresias ordered me to journey out\
          to many human cities, carrying\
          in my hands a well-made oar, till I reached\
          a people who know nothing of the sea,\
          who don\'92t put salt on any food they eat,                                                                         \
          and have no knowledge of ships painted red\
[350] or well-made oars that serve those ships as wings.                                 \
          He told me a sure sign I won\'92t conceal\'97\
          when someone else runs into me and says\
          I\'92ve got a shovel used for winnowing\
          on my broad shoulders, he told me to set it\
          in the ground there, make rich sacrifice                           \
          to lord Poseidon with a ram, a bull,                                   \
          and a boar that breeds with sows, then leave,\
          go home, and there make sacred offerings\
          to immortal gods who hold wide heaven,                                                                       \
[360] all of them in order. My death will come                                  \
          far from the sea, such a gentle passing,\
          when I\'92m bowed down with a ripe old age,\
          with my people prospering around me.\
          He said all this would happen to me.\'94\
          \
          Wise Penelope then said to him:\
          \'93If it\'92s true the gods\
          are going to bring you a happier old age,\
          there\'92s hope you\'92ll have relief from trouble.\'94\
          \
          While they went on talking to each other in this way,\
          Eurynome and the nurse prepared the bed\
[370] with soft coverlets, by light from flaming torches.                                                      \
          Once they\'92d quickly covered up the sturdy bed,\
          the old nurse went back to her room to rest,\
          and the bedroom servant, Eurynome, led them\
          on their way to bed, a torch gripped in her hands. \
          When she\'92d brought them to the room, then she returned.\
          Odysseus and Penelope approached with joy\
          the place where their bed stood from earlier days.\
          Telemachus, Philoetius, and Eumaeus\
          stopped their dancing feet, made the women stop as well,\
[380] and then lay down in the shadowy hall to sleep.                                                  \
          Odysseus and Penelope, once they\'92d had the joy                                                                \
          of making love, then entertained each other\
          telling stories, in mutual conversation. \
          The lovely lady talked of all she\'92d been through\
          in the house, looking at that destructive group,\
          the suitors, who, because of her, had butchered\
          so many cattle and fat sheep and drained from jars\
          so much wine. Odysseus, born from Zeus, then told\
          all the troubles he\'92d brought down on men, all the grief\
[390] he\'92d had to work through on his own. Penelope                              \
          was happy listening, and sleep did not flow down\
          across her eyelids until he\'92d told it all.\
          He began by telling how he first destroyed                                                                                \
          the Cicones, and then came to the fertile land\
          of Lotus-eating men, and all the Cyclops did\'97\
          and how he forced him to pay the penalty\
          for his brave comrades eaten by the Cyclops\'97\
          then how he came to Aeolus, who\'92d taken him in\
          quite willingly and sent him on his way.\
[400] But it was not yet his destiny to reach                                              \
          his dear native land. Instead, storm winds once more\
          caught him, drove him across the fish-filled seas,\
          for all his weary groans. He told how he next came\
          to Telepylos where the Laestrygonians live,\
          men who destroyed his ships and well-armed comrades,\
          all of them, and how Odysseus was the only one                                                                 \
          to escape in his black ship.1 He went on to talk\
          of Circe\'92s devious resourcefulness and how\
          in his ship with many oars he\'92d then gone down\
[410] to Hades\'92 murky home in order to consult                                       \
          the spirit of Teiresias of Thebes and seen\
          all his companions and his mother, who bore him\
          and raised him as a child, and how he\'92d listened to\
          the Sirens\'92 voices, in their never-ending song,\
          then come to the Wandering Rocks, dread Charybdis,\
          and to Scylla, whom men have never yet escaped\
          without being harmed, how his comrades slaughtered\
          the oxen of sun god Helios, how his ship\
          was shattered by a flaming lightning bolt thrown down                                               \
[420] from high-thundering Zeus, how his fine comrades perished,                 \
          all at once, while he alone escaped from fate,\
          how he reached the nymph Calypso on her island,\
          Ogygia, how she kept him in her hollow caves,\
          longing for him to be her husband, nurturing him\
          and telling him she\'92d make him an immortal\
          who through all his days would not get any older,\
          but she could not convince the heart within his chest,\
          how, after suffering a great deal, he then had come\
          to the Phaeacians, who greatly honoured him,\
[430] as if he were a god, and sent him in a ship                                               \
          to his dear native land, after offering gifts\
          of bronze and gold and rich supplies of clothing.\
          He stopped his story at that point, when sweet sleep,\
          which makes men\'92s limbs relax, came over him,\
          and eased disturbing worries he had in his heart.\
          Then Athena, goddess with the gleaming eyes,\
          came up with something else. When she thought Odysseus\
          had had his heart\'92s fill of pleasure with his wife and slept,\
          from Ocean she quickly stirred up early Dawn \
[440] on her golden throne to bring her light to men.                                                   \
          Odysseus rose from his soft bed and told his wife:\
          \'93Lady, the two of us by now have had                                                                                 \
          sufficient trouble\'97you here lamenting\
          my hazardous return, while, in my case,\
          Zeus and the other gods kept me tied up\
          far from my native land, in great distress,\
          for all my eagerness to get back home.\
          Now that we\'92ve come back to the bed we love,\
          you should tend to our wealth inside the house.\
[450] As for the flocks those arrogant suitors stole,                                              \
          I\'92ll seize many beasts as plunder on my own,\
          and Achaeans will give others, till they fill up\
          each and every pen. Now I\'92m going to go\
          out to my forest lands, and there I\'92ll see\
          my noble father, who on my behalf                                                                                      \
          has suffered such anxiety. Lady,\
          since I know how intelligent you are,\
          I\'92m asking you to follow these instructions\'97\
          once sunrise comes, the story will be out\
[460] about the suitors slaughtered in our home.                                                   \
          So you should go up to your upper room\
          with your female attendants. Then sit there.\
          Don\'92t look in on anyone or ask questions.\'94\
          \
          Once he\'92d said this, he put his splendid armour on,\
          around his shoulders, and roused Telemachus,\
          Philoetius, and Eumaeus, and told them all\
          to get weapons in their hands to fight a war.\
          They did not disobey, but dressed themselves in bronze,\
          opened the doors, and went outside, with Odysseus                                                       \
[470] in the lead. By now light was shining on the ground,                                      \
          but Athena kept them hidden by the night,\
          as she led them quickly from the city.}