{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf460
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural\qc

\f0\fs24 \cf0 Book Twenty-Four\
Zeus and Athena End the Fighting\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural
\cf0           \
[Hermes conducts the shades of the dead suitors down to Hades, where they meet Achilles, Patroclus, Antilochus, and Agamemnon; Agamemnon and Achilles talk; Agamemnon gives details of Achilles\'92 burial; Amphimedon complains to Agamemnon about his death at Odysseus\'92 hands; Agamemnon pays tribute to Odysseus and Penelope; Odysseus goes out to find his father; Laertes and Odysseus talk in the vineyard, and Odysseus tests his father with a false story and then reveals his identity; the two men return to Laertes\'92 house, where Eumaeus, Philoetius, and Telemachus have prepared dinner; Laertes\'92 appearance is transformed; Dolius and his sons arrive; the men in Ithaca hear about the slaughter and collect their dead; Eupeithes urges action against Odysseus; Medon and Halitherses advise against such action; the majority decide to follow Eupeithes; Athena questions Zeus about his intentions regarding Odysseus; Zeus tells her to deal with the situation; Odysseus and his followers arm themselves and go out to meet the Ithacan army; Athena urges Laertes to throw a spear; Laertes kills Eupeithes; Athena stops the Ithacan army and sends it back to the city; a thunderbolt from Zeus stops Odysseus; Athena establishes a lasting oath between both sides.]\
          \
          Meanwhile Hermes of Cyllene summoned up\
          the spirits of the suitors. In his hand he held\
          the beautiful gold wand he uses to enchant\
          the eyes of anyone he wishes or to wake\
          some other man from sleep. With it he roused and led\
          these spirits, who kept squeaking as they followed him.\
          Just as inside the corners of a monstrous cave\
          bats flit around and squeak when one of them falls down\
  [10] out of the cluster on the rock where they cling\
          to one another, that how these spirits squawked                              \
          as they moved on together. Hermes the Deliverer                                                                   \
          conducted them along the murky passageway.1\
          They went past the streams of Ocean, past Leucas,\
          past the gates of the Sun and the land of Dreams,\
          and very soon came to the field of asphodel, \
          where spirits live, the shades of those whose work is done.2\
          Here they found Achilles\'92 shade, son of Peleus,\
          and of Patroclus, too, noble Antilochus,\
          and Ajax, who had the finest form and shape\
  [20] of all Danaans, after the son of Peleus,                                                                          \
          who had no peer. These shades were gathered there,\
          in a group around Achilles. Then to them came                                                                  \
          the spirit of Agamemnon, son of Atreus,                       \
          full of sorrow. Around him were assembled shades\
          of all those who\'92d been killed with him and met their fate\
          in Aegisthus\'92 house. The son of Peleus\'92 shade\
          was the first to speak to him:\
          \'93Son of Atreus,\
          we thought of you as one well loved by Zeus, \
          who hurls the thunderbolt, for all your days,\
  [30] more so than every other human warrior,                                \
          because on Trojan soil you were the king\
          of many powerful men, where we Achaeans\
          went through so much distress. And now it seems\
          destructive Fate was destined to reach you,\
          as well, and far too soon, the mortal doom\
          that no man born escapes. O how I wish                                                                         \
          you\'92d met your fatal end in Trojan lands,\
          still in full possession of those honours\
          you were master of. Then all Achaeans\
  [40] would have made a tomb for you\'97for your son                       \
          you\'92d have won great fame in future days.\
          But as it is, your fate was to be caught\
          in a death more pitiful than any.\'94\
          \
          The shade of Atreus\'92 son then answered him:\
          \'93Godlike Achilles, fortunate son of Peleus,\
          killed in the land of Troy, far from Argos.\
          Other men fell round you, the finest sons\
          of Trojans and Achaeans, in the fight\
          above your corpse. You lay in the swirling dust,\
  [50] a great man in your full magnificence,                                                                            \
          with your skill in horsemanship forgotten.\
          As for us, we fought there all day long.\
          We never would have pulled back from the fight,\
          if Zeus had not brought on a storm to end it.\
          We took you from the battle to the ships, \
          laid you on a bier, and with warm water\
          and oil we cleaned your lovely skin. And then,\
          standing around you, the Danaans wept,\
          shedding plenty of hot tears, and cut their hair.\
  [60] When your mother heard the news, she came                          \
          with immortal sea nymphs up from the sea.3\
          An amazing cry arose above the water\'97\
          all Achaeans were then seized with trembling.\
          They would\'92ve all jumped up and run away                                                                 \
          to the hollow ships, if one man, well versed\
          in ancient wisdom, had not held them back.\
          I mean Nestor, whose advice in earlier days\
          had seemed the best. Using his wise judgment,\
          he addressed them all and said:\
          \
          \'91Hold on, Argives.\
  [70] You young Achaean men, don\'92t rush away.                                     \
          This is his mother coming from the sea\
          with her immortal sea nymphs to look on\
          the face of her dead son.\'92\
          \
          \'93That\'92s what Nestor said,\
          and the brave Achaeans stopped their running.\
          Then the daughters of the Old Man of the Sea\
          stood round you in a piteous lament, \
          as they put immortal clothing on you.4\
          And Muses, nine in all, sang out a dirge,                                                                        \
          their lovely voices answering each other.               \
  [80] You\'92d not have seen a single Argive there                                 \
          without tears, their hearts so deeply moved\
          by the Muses\'92 clear-toned song. We mourned you\
          for seventeen days and nights together,\
          both mortal humans and immortal gods.\
          On the eighteenth we gave you to the fire.\
          Around you we killed many well-fed sheep\
          and bent-horned cattle. You were cremated\
          in clothing of the gods, with sweet honey\
          and much oil. Many Achaean warriors\
  [90] moved around the funeral pyre in armour,                                                   \
          as you were burning, both foot soldiers                                                                            \
          and charioteers, making an enormous noise.\
          And then, Achilles, once Hephaestus\'92 flame\
          was finished with you, we set your white bones\
          in unmixed wine and oil. Your mother gave\
          a two-handled jar of gold. She said it was\
          a gift from Dionysus, something made\
          by illustrious Hephaestus. In this jar,\
          glorious Achilles, lie your white bones,\
[100] mixed in with those of dead Patroclus,                                                              \
          son of Menoetius.5  Separate from these\
          are Antilochus\'92 bones, whom you honoured\
          above all the rest of your companions\
          after Patroclus.6 Then, over these bones                                                                           \
          we raised a huge impressive burial mound,       \
          we\'97the sacred army of Argive spearmen\'97\
          on a promontory projecting out\
          into the wide Hellespont, so that men,\
          those now alive and those in future days,\
[110] can view it from a long way out at sea.                                                              \
          Your mother asked the gods for lovely prizes\
          and set them out among the best Achaeans\
          for a competition. In earlier days\
          you\'92ve been present at the funeral games\
          of many warriors, when, once a king dies,\
          the young men, after tying up their clothes,\
          prepare to win the contests. But if you\'92d seen                                                           \
          that spectacle you\'92d have truly marveled\'97\
          the goddess, silver-footed Thetis, set\
[120] such beautiful prizes in your honour.                                                                  \
          The gods had that much special love for you.\
          So even in death, your name did not die.\
          No. Your glorious fame, Achilles, will endure\
          among all men forever. As for me,\
          I finished off the war, but what pleasure\
          does that give me now? When I got back home,\
          Zeus organized a dreadful fate for me,\
          at Aegisthus\'92 hands and my accursed wife\'92s.\'947\
          \
          As they talked this way to one another, Hermes,\
[130] killer of Argus, came up close to them, leading down                      \
          the shades of suitors whom Odysseus had killed.                                                                \
          When they observed this, the two, in their amazement,\
          went straight up to them. The shade of Agamemnon,\
          son of Atreus, recognized the well-loved son\
          of Melaneus, splendid Amphimedon,\
          a guest friend of his from Ithaca, his home.\
          The shade of Atreus\'92 son spoke to him first, saying:\
          \'93Amphimedon, what have you suffered,\
          all of you picked men of the same age,\
[140] to come down here beneath the gloomy earth?                                        \
          If one were to choose the city\'92s finest men,\
          one would not select any men but these.\
          Did Poseidon overwhelm you in your ships\
          by rousing violent winds and giant waves?                                                                    \
          Or did hostile forces on the mainland\
          kill you off, while you were taking cattle\
          or rich flocks of sheep, or were they fighting\
          to protect their city and their women?\
          Answer what I\'92m asking. For I can claim\
[150] I am your guest friend. Don\'92t you remember                           \
          the time I made a visit to your home\
          with godlike Menelaus\'97to urge Odysseus\
          to come with us in our well-benched ships\
          to Ilion? It took us an entire month\
          to cross all that wide sea, and it was hard\
          to win Odysseus, sacker of cities,\
          over to our side.\'94\
          \
          Amphimedon\'92s shade                                                                          \
          then answered him and said:\
          \'93Noble son of Atreus,\
          Agamemnon, Zeus-fostered king of men,  \
[160] I do remember all these things you say,                                                            \
          and I\'92ll describe for you every detail,\
          the truth of how we died, a wicked fate,\
          and how it came about. For many years,\
          Odysseus was away from home, so we\
          began to court his wife. She did not refuse\
          a marriage she detested, nor did she\
          go through with it. Instead, she organized\
          a gloomy destiny for us, our death.\
          In her heart she thought up another trick.\
[170] She had a huge loom set up in her rooms                                 \
          and on it wove a delicate wide fabric.                                                                                 \
          And right away she said this to us: \
          \
          \'91Young men,\
          my suitors, since lord Odysseus is dead,\
          you\'92re keen for me to marry\'97you must wait\
          until I\'92m finished with this robe, so I\
          don\'92t waste this woven yarn in useless work.\
          It\'92s a burial shroud for lord Laertes,\
          for when the lethal fate of his sad death\
          will seize him, so no Achaean woman\
[180] in the district will get angry with me                                 \
          that a man who\'92d won much property                              \
          should have to lie without a death shroud.\'92\
          \
          That\'92s what she said, and our proud hearts agreed.\
          So day by day she\'92d weave at that great loom.\
          At night she\'92d have torches placed beside her                                                             \
          and keep unraveling it. She tricked Achaeans\
          for three years with this scheme\'97they believed her.\
          But as the seasons changed and months rolled on,\
          and many days passed by, the fourth year came.\
[190] Then one of her women, who knew the plan,                                            \
          spoke out, and we came in and caught her\
          undoing the lovely yarn. So after that\
          we made her finish it against her will.\
          Once she\'92d woven it and washed the fabric,\
          she displayed the robe\'97it shone like the sun\
          or like the moon. Then some malignant god\
          brought Odysseus back from some foreign place \
          to the borders of the field where the swineherd                                                        \
          has his house. And there, too, came the dear son\
[200] of godlike Odysseus, once he\'92d returned                                  \
          in his black ship, back from sandy Pylos.8\
          The two hatched a plan against the suitors,\
          to bring them to a nasty death, then left\
          for the well-known city. Telemachus\
          made the journey first, whereas Odysseus\
          got there later. The swineherd led his master,\
          who wore shabby clothing on his body\'97\
          he looked like an ancient worn-out beggar\
          leaning on a stick, rags covering his skin.\
[210] So none of us could recognize the man                                    \
          when he suddenly showed up, not even                                                                           \
          older men. We pelted him with insults,\
          hurled things at him, but for a little while\
          his firm heart kept enduring what we threw\
          and how we taunted him in his own home.\
          But when aegis-bearing Zeus aroused him,\
          with Telemachus\'92 help he took away\
          the fine weapons, put them in a storeroom,\
          and locked the bolt. Then, with his great cunning,\
[220] he told his wife to place before the suitors                                \
          his bow and gray iron axes, a contest\
          for those of us who bore an evil fate,\
          the prelude to our death. None of us                                                                                   \
          could stretch the string on that powerful bow.\
          We weren\'92t nearly strong enough. But then,\
          when the great bow was in Odysseus\'92 hands,\
          we all called out to say we should not give\
          that bow to him, no matter what he said.\
          Telemachus alone kept urging him\'97\
[230] he told him to do it. Once lord Odysseus,                                                      \
          who had endured so much, picked up the bow,\
          he strung it with ease and shot an arrow\
          through the iron axes. Then he went and stood\
          inside the doorway with a fearful glare\
          and kept shooting volleys of swift arrows.\
          He hit lord Antinous and went on shooting,                                                                \
          aiming at other men across the room,\
          letting lethal arrows fly. Men collapsed,\
          falling thick and fast. Then we realized\
[240] some god was helping them, when all at once                          \
          they charged out in a frenzy through the house,\
          butchering men everywhere. The screams\
          were hideous, as heads were smashed apart.\
          The whole floor swam with blood. That\'92s how we died,\
          Agamemnon, and even now our bodies\
          are lying uncared for in Odysseus\'92 house.\
          Each man\'92s friends at home don\'92t know what\'92s happened,\
          the ones who\'92d wash the black blood from our wounds,\
          then lay our bodies out and weep for us,                                                                         \
[250] the necessary rites for those who\'92ve died.\'94                                                     \
          \
          The shade of Atreus\'92 son then answered Amphimedon:\
          \'93O son of Laertes, happy Odysseus,\
          a resourceful man, who won himself\
          a wife whose excellence was truly great.\
          How fine the heart in faultless Penelope,\
          daughter of Icarius!  She remembered well\
          the husband she was married to, Odysseus.\
          The story of her excellence will not die\'97\
          immortal gods will make a pleasing song\
[260] for men on earth about faithful Penelope.                                                     \
          Tyndareus\'92 daughter acted differently, \
          when she planned to carry out her evil acts \
          and killed her wedded husband\'97among men                                                           \
          there\'92ll be a hateful song for her.9  She gives\
          all women an evil reputation,\
          even one whose actions are done well.\'94\
          \
          So these two talked to one another, as they stood\
          in the house of Hades, deep beneath the earth.\
          Once Odysseus and his men had left the city,\
[270] they soon reached Laertes\'92 fine, well-managed farm,                                     \
          which Laertes had once won by his own efforts,\
          working really hard. His house was there, with sheds\
          surrounding it on every side, where his servants,\
          bonded slaves who worked to carry out his wishes,                                                           \
          ate and sat and slept. An old Sicilian woman\
          lived inside his house, looking after the old man,\
          caring for him at the farm, far from the city.\
          Odysseus then spoke to his servants and his son:\
          \'93You should go inside the well-built home.\
[280] Hurry up and kill the finest pig there is,                                                           \
          so we can eat. I\'92ll sound out my father,\
          to find out if he can recognize me,\
          see who I am, once he\'92s laid eyes on me,\
          or if he doesn\'92t know me any more,\
          since I\'92ve been away so long.\'94\
          \
          Odysseus spoke,\
          then gave his battle weapons to his servants.\
          They quickly went inside the house. Then Odysseus,                                                      \
          walking out to test his father, came up beside\
          the fruitful vineyard and from there continued down\
[290] to the extensive orchard, where he failed to find                              \
          Dolius or any sons of his father\'92s slaves.\
          They\'92d gone off to gather large rocks for the wall\
          around the vineyard, with the old man in the lead.\
          In the well-established vineyard he found his father.\
          He was digging round a plant, all by himself, \
          dressed in a filthy, shabby, patched-up tunic.\
          Around his legs he\'92d tied shin pads stitched from ox-hide\
          to protect himself from scratches, and on his hands                                                         \
          he had on gloves, since there were thistles in that spot.\
[300] On his head he wore a goatskin hat. In these clothes                       \
          he was dealing with his grief. When lord Odysseus,\
          who had endured so much, saw him worn down with age \
          and carrying so much heavy sorrow in his heart, \
          he stood under a tall pear tree and shed a tear,\
          debating in his mind and heart whether he should\
          embrace and kiss his father or describe for him\
          in detail how he got back to his native land\
          or start by questioning him, to test him out\
          on every point. As he thought about his options,\
[310] the best decision seemed to be to test him first,                                                              \
          using words which might provoke him. With this in mind,\
          lord Odysseus went straight up to his father,\
          who was digging round a plant with his head down.\
          His splendid son stood there beside him and spoke out:\
          \'93Old man, from the way you tend this orchard\
          you\'92ve no lack of skill. No. Your care is good.\
          There\'92s nothing here\'97no plant, fig tree, vine,\
          olive, pear, or garden plot in all the field\'97\
          that needs some care. I\'92ll tell you something else\'97\
[320] don\'92t let this make you angry in your heart\'97                          \
          you yourself are not being well looked after.\
          Along with your old age, you\'92re filthy dirty,                                                                  \
          and badly dressed in those disgusting clothes.\
          Surely it can\'92t be because you\'92re lazy\
          your lord refuses to look after you.\
          In appearance you don\'92t seem to be a slave,\
          not when one sees your stature and your shape.\
          You\'92re like a king, the kind of man who bathes\
          and eats and goes to sleep in a soft bed,\
[330] as old men should. So come now, tell me this,                                          \
          and speak out candidly\'97Whose slave are you?\
          Whose orchard are you tending? And tell me\
          the truth about this, too, so I understand\'97\
          Is this place we\'92ve reached really Ithaca,\
          as some man I just met on my way here                                                                          \
          told me. His mind was not too clever\'97\
          he didn\'92t try to tell me any details\
          or listen to my words when I asked him\
          about a friend of mine, if he\'92s still alive\
[340] or is in Hades\'92 home, already dead.                                                                      \
          I\'92ll explain it to you. Listen to me,\
          and pay attention. In my dear native land,\
          I once entertained a man, someone who\'92d come\
          to my own home. No other human being\
          from far away has visited my house\
          as a more welcome guest. He said he came\
          from Ithaca. He told me his father                                                                                         \
          was Laertes, son of Arcesius.                 \
          I took him to the house, entertained him\
[350] with generous hospitality, and gave him                                   \
          a kind reception with the many things\
          I had inside my home, providing him\
          appropriate friendship gifts. I gave him\
          seven talents of finely crafted gold,\
          a silver mixing bowl etched with flowers,\
          twelve cloaks with single folds, twelve coverlets,\
          as many splendid cloaks, and, besides these,\
          as many tunics and, what\'92s more, four women\
          skilled in fine handicrafts and beautiful, \
[360] the very ones he wished to choose himself.\'94                                                 \
          \
          Then his father shed a tear and answered him:                                                                      \
          \'93Stranger, yes indeed, you\'92ve reached the country\
          which you asked about. But it\'92s been taken over\
          by arrogant and reckless men. Those presents,\
          the countless gifts you freely gave, are useless.\
          If you\'92d come across him still living here,\
          in Ithaca, he\'92d have sent you on your way\
          after paying you back with splendid presents\
          and fine hospitality\'97that\'92s the right\
[370] of him who offers kindness first. But come,                                                  \
          tell me this, and make sure you speak the truth.\
          How many years ago did you welcome him,\
          that unlucky guest, my son, if, indeed,\
          such an ill-fated man ever was alive?                                                                                  \
          Somewhere far from native land and friends\
          the fish have eaten him down in the sea,\
          or on land he\'92s been the prey of savage beasts \
          and birds. Neither his father nor his mother,\
          we who gave him birth, could lay him out\
[380] for burial or lament for him. Nor did                                        \
          the wife he courted with so many gifts,\
          faithful Penelope, bewail her husband\
          on his bier, closing up his eyes in death,\
          as is appropriate, though that\'92s a rite\
          we owe the dead. And tell me this, as well\'97\
          speaking the truth so I can understand\'97\
          Among men who are you? Where are you from?\
          What is your city? Who are your parents?\
          Where did you and your god-like companions\
[390] anchor the swift ship that brought you here?                                               \
          Or did you come on other people\'92s ship                                                                          \
          as passenger, men who let you disembark\
          and then set off again?\'94\
          \
          Resourceful Odysseus\
          then answered him:\
          \'93All right, I\'92ll tell you everything\
          quite truthfully. I come from Alybas,\
          where I have a lovely home. I\'92m the son\
          of Apheidas, lord Polypemon\'92s son.\
          My name\'92s Eperitus. But then some god\
          made me go off course from Sicania,\
[400] so I\'92ve come here against my will. My ship                               \
          is anchored over there, close to the fields\
          far from the city. As for Odysseus,\
          this is the fifth year since he went away                                                                           \
          and left my country. That unlucky man!\
          There were auspicious omens from some birds\
          flying on the right, when he departed.\
          So when I sent him off, I was happy,\
          and so was he. The hearts in both of us\
          hoped we\'92d meet again as host and guest,\
[410] and give each other splendid presents.\'94                                                            \
          \
          As Odysseus said these words, a black cloud of grief\
          swallowed up Laertes. With both hands he scooped up\
          some grimy dust and dumped it over his gray hair,\
          moaning all the time. He stirred Odysseus\'92 heart.\
          Already, as he looked at his dear father, sharp pains\
          were shooting up his nostrils. He jumped over,\
          embraced Laertes, kissed him, and then said:                                                                        \
          \'93Father,\
          I\'92m here\'97the very man you asked about.\
          I\'92ve returned here in the twentieth year,\
[420] back to my native land. Stop your grieving,                                                 \
          these tearful moans. I\'92ll tell you everything,\
          though it\'92s essential we move really fast.\
          I\'92ve killed the suitors in our home, avenged\
          their heart-rending insolence, their evil acts.\'94 \
          \
          Laertes then answered him and said:\
          \'93If that\'92s true,\
          if you are indeed my son Odysseus\
          and have come back, show me some evidence,\
          something clear so I can be quite certain.\'94\
          \
          Resourceful Odysseus replied to him and said:                                                                      \
[430] \'93First, let your eyes inspect this scar\'97a boar                            \
          inflicted that on me with its white tusk,\
          when I went to Parnassus, sent there\
          by you and by my honourable mother,\
          to her cherished father, Autolycus,\
          so I could get the gifts he\'92d promised me,\
          what he\'92d agreed to give when he was here.\
          Come, I\'92ll tell you the trees you gave me once\
          in the well-established vineyard\'97back then\
          I was a child following you in the yard,\
[440] and I asked about each one. It was here\'97                                \
          we walked by these very trees. You named them\
          and described them to me. You offered me\
          thirteen pear trees and ten apple trees                                                                             \
          along with forty fig trees. In the same way,\
          you said you\'92d give me fifty rows of vines,\
          bearing all sorts of different types of grapes,\
          when Zeus\'92 seasons load their tops with fruit.\'94\
          \
          As Odysseus spoke, his father\'92s fond heart and knees\
          gave way\'97he clearly recognized the evidence\
[450] Odysseus had presented. He threw both his arms                            \
          around the son he loved and struggled hard to breathe.\
          Lord Odysseus, who had endured so much, held him.\
          After he\'92d revived and his spirit came once more\
          into his chest, Laertes spoke again and said:                                                                            \
          \'93Father Zeus, it seems you gods are still\
          on high Olympus, if it\'92s true those suitors\
          have paid the price of their proud arrogance.\
          But now my heart contains a dreadful fear\'97\
          all the men of Ithaca will soon come here\
[460] against us, and they\'92ll send out messengers                              \
          all through Cephallenia, to every city.\'94\
          \
          Resourceful Odysseus then answered him and said:\
          \'93Take courage, and don\'92t allow these things\
          to weigh down your heart. Let\'92s go to the house,\
          the one close to the orchard, where I sent\
          Telemachus, together with the swineherd\
          and the keeper of the goats, so they could\
          prepare a meal as soon as possible.\'94                                                                                    \
          \
          After they\'92d talked like this, they went to the fine house.\
[470] Once they reached Laertes\'92 well-furnished home, they found          \
          Telemachus with the swineherd and goat keeper\
          carving lots of meat and mixing gleaming wine.\
          Inside the home the Sicilian servant woman\
          gave great-hearted Laertes a bath, then rubbed him\
          with oil and threw a lovely cloak around him.\
          Athena then approached and fleshed out the limbs\
          on that shepherd of his people. She made him\
          taller than before and sturdier to the eye.\
          When he left the bath, his dear son was astonished\'97                                                   \
[480] as he looked at him he seemed like the immortals.                                           \
          Odysseus spoke to him\'97his words had wings:\
          \'93Father, surely one of the eternal gods\
          has made you handsomer to look at\'97\
          both your form and stature.\'94\
          \
          Wise Laertes\
          then answered him and said:\
          \'93By Father Zeus,\
          Athena, and Apollo, I wish I were\
          just like I was when I took Nericus\
          on the mainland coast, that well-built fortress,\
          when I was king of Cephallenians.\
[490] With strength like that, I could\'92ve stood with you                     \
          yesterday, my armour on my shoulders,                                                                         \
          and driven off the suitors in our home.\
          I\'92d have made many of their knees go slack\
          inside the hall\'97I\'92d have pleased your heart.\'94\
          \
          In this way, the two men conversed with one another.\
          Meanwhile, the other men had finished working\
          Dinner was prepared. So they sat down one by one\
          on stools and chairs. As they were reaching for the food,\
          old Dolius appeared. With him came his sons,\
[500] tired out from work. The ancient Sicilian woman,                                             \
          their mother, had gone outside and summoned them.\
          She fed them and took good care of the old man,                                                             \
          now that his age had laid its grip on him. These men,\
          once they saw Odysseus and their hearts took note of him,\
          stood in the house astonished. Then Odysseus\
          talked to them with reassuring words and said:\
          \'93Old man, sit down and have some dinner.\
          Forget being so amazed. For some time now\
          we\'92ve been keen to turn our hands to dinner,\
[510] but we kept expecting you\'92d be coming,                                                          \
          so we\'92ve been waiting in the house.\'94\
          \
          Odysseus spoke.\
          Dolius went straight up to him, both arms outstretched,\
          grabbed Odysseus\'92 hand and kissed it on the wrist.\
          Then he spoke to him\'97his words had wings:\
          \'93My friend,                                             \
          you\'92re back with us, who longed for your return\
          but never thought to see it!  The gods themselves\
          must have been leading you. Joyful greetings!\
          May gods grant you success!  Be frank with me\
          and tell me so I fully understand\'97\
[520] Does wise Penelope now know for certain                               \
          you\'92ve come back here, or should we send her\
          a messenger?\'94\
          \
          Resourceful Odysseus answered him\
          and said:\
          \'93Old man, she already knows.\
          Why should you be so concerned about it?\'94\
          \
          Odysseus spoke, and Dolius sat down again\
          on his polished stool. Then Dolius\'92 sons\
          also came up around glorious Odysseus,\
          clasping his hands with words of welcome. Then they sat                                          \
          in a row alongside Dolius, their father.\
[530] So these men occupied themselves with dinner                                \
          inside the house.\
          Meanwhile, Rumour the Messenger\
          sped swiftly through the entire city, speaking\
          of the suitors\'92 dreadful death, their destiny.\
          People heard about it all at once and came in\
          from all directions, gathering with mournful groans\
          before Odysseus\'92 home. Each one brought his dead\
          outside the house and buried them. All the men\
          from other cities they sent home, placing them\
          aboard swift ships to be escorted back by sailors.\
[540] Then, with sorrowful hearts, they went in person                                    \
          to meet in an assembly. Once they\'92d got there\
          together in a group, Eupeithes rose to speak.\
          Constant grief lay on his heart for his own son,\
          Antinous, the first man killed by lord Odysseus.\
          Weeping for him, he spoke to the assembly:\
          \'93My friends, this man has planned and carried out\
          dreadful acts against Achaeans. He led\
          many fine courageous men off in his fleet,\
          then lost his hollow ships, with all men dead.\
[550] Now he\'92s come and killed our finest men by far                       \
          among the Cephallenians. So come on,\
          before he can quickly get to Pylos                                                                                         \
          or to holy Elis, where Epeians rule,\
          let\'92s get started. If not, in future days\
          we\'92ll be eternally disgraced, since men\
          yet to be born will learn about our shame,\
          if we don\'92t act to take out our revenge\
          on those murderers of our sons and brothers.\
          As far as I\'92m concerned, the life we\'92d live\
[560] would not be sweet. I rather die right now                                \
          and live among the dead. So let us go,\
          in case those men have a head start on us\
          and get across the sea.\'94\
          \
          As Eupeithes said this,\
          he wept, and all Achaeans were seized by pity.\
          Then Medon and the godlike singer, released\
          from sleep, approached them from Odysseus\'92 house,                                                     \
          and stood up in their midst. They were astonished.\
          Then Medon, a shrewd man, spoke out.\
          \'93Men of Ithaca,\
          now hear me. Odysseus didn\'92t plan these acts\
[570] without the gods\'92 consent. I myself observed                            \
          an immortal god who stood beside him, \
          looking in every detail just like Mentor.\
          The deathless god appeared before Odysseus\
          at that time to spur him on to action,\
          and, at another time, charged through the hall,\
          terrifying the suitors. They collapsed in droves.\'94\
          \
          As Medon spoke, pale fear gripped them all. And then,                                              \
          old warrior Halitherses, son of Mastor, addressed them.\
          He was the only man who could see past and future.\
[580] Bearing in the mind their common good, he spoke out,                              \
          saying these words:\
          \'93Men of Ithaca, \
          listen to me now, hear what I have to say. \
          What\'92s happened now, my friends, has come about\
          because of your own stupidity.\
          You just would not follow my instructions\
          or Mentor\'92s, that shepherd of his people,\
          and make your sons stop their reckless conduct,\
          their monstrous acts of wanton foolishness,\
          squandering a fine man\'92s property and then\
[590] dishonouring his wife, claiming the man                                          \
          never would come back. So now, let that be,                          \
          and agree with what I\'92m going to tell you\'97\
          we should not move out, in case some men here\
          run into trouble they\'92ve brought on themselves.\'94\
          \
          He ended. Some men stayed together in their seats,\
          but others, more than half, jumped up with noisy shouts.\
          Their hearts had not responded to what he\'92d just said.\
          They\'92d been won over by Eupeithes. And so,\
          they quickly rushed away to get their weapons.\
[600] Once they\'92d put gleaming bronze around their bodies,                                \
          they gathered in a group on the spacious grounds                              \
          before the city. Eupeithes was the leader\
          in this foolishness. He thought he could avenge                                                                   \
          the killing of his son, but he would not return\'97\
          that\'92s where he was going to meet his fate.\
          Then Athena spoke to Zeus, Cronos\'92 son, saying:\
          \'93Father of us all and son of Cronos,\
          highest of all those who rule, answer me\
          when I ask this\'97What are you concealing\
[610] in that mind of yours? Will you be creating                              \
          further brutal war and dreadful battle,                                     \
          or bring both sides together here as friends?\'94\
          \
          Cloud-gatherer Zeus then answered her and said:\
          \'93My child, why are you asking this of me?\
          Why these questions? Were you not the one\
          who devised this plan all on your own,\
          so Odysseus could take out his revenge                                                                           \
          against these men, after he got back?\
          Do as you wish. But I\'92ll lay out for you\
[620] what I think is right. Since lord Odysseus                                 \
          has paid back the suitors, let them swear                                 \
          a binding oath that he\'92ll remain their king\
          all his life, and let\'92s make them forget\
          the killing of their sons and brothers.\
          Let them love each other as they used to,\
          and let there be wealth and peace in plenty.\'94\
          \
          His words stirred up Athena, who was already keen.\
          She swooped down from the heights of Mount Olympus.\
          Meanwhile, once his group had eaten their hearts\'92 fill\
[630] of food as sweet as honey, lord Odysseus,                                                                           \
          who had endured so much, was the first to speak:                             \
          \'93Someone should go outside to look around,\
          see whether they are getting close to us.\'94\
          \
          Once he said this, a son of Dolius went out,\
          as he had ordered. He stood in the doorway\
          and saw all those men approaching. At once\
          he called out to Odysseus\'97his words had wings:\
          \'93They\'92re here, close by. Let\'92s get our weapons\'97\
          we\'92d better hurry!\'94\
          \
          At these words, they leapt up\
[640] and put on their armour. Odysseus and his men                              \
          were four, the sons of Dolius six, and with them                               \
          Dolius and Laertes, though they had gray hair,\
          were dressed in armour, too, forced to be warriors.\
          When they\'92d put glittering bronze around their bodies,                                              \
          they opened up the doors and went outside. Odysseus\
          led them out. But then Athena, Zeus\'92 daughter,\
          with the shape and voice of Mentor, came up to them.\
          When lord Odysseus, who\'92d endured so much, saw her,\
          he was glad and quickly spoke up to Telemachus,\
          his dear son:\
[650] \'93Telemachus, now you\'92ve reached                    \
          the field of battle, where the finest men                                   \
          are put to the test. Soon enough you\'92ll learn\
          not to disgrace your ancestral family\'97\
          for in earlier times we\'92ve been preeminent\
          for strength and courage everywhere on earth.\'94\
          \
          Shrewd Telemachus then answered him and said:                                                             \
          \'93Dear father, if that\'92s what you want, you\'92ll see\
          that I, with my heart as it is at present,\
          won\'92t shame your family. I\'92ll do what you say.\'94\
          \
[660] When he said this, Laertes felt great joy and said:                                              \
          \'93You dear gods, what a day this is for me!                               \
          I\'92m really happy when my son and grandson\
          compete for excellence with one another.\'94\
          \
          Then Athena with the glittering eyes came up,\
          stood by Laertes, and said to him:\
          \'93Child of Arcesius,\
          by far the dearest of all those I cherish,\
          pray to the young girl with the flashing eyes\
          and to Father Zeus, then without delay\
          raise that long spear of yours and throw it.\'94\
          \
[670] Pallas Athena spoke and then breathed into him                                     \
          enormous power. Laertes said a prayer                                          \
          to great Zeus\'92 daughter, and quickly lifting up\
          his long-shadowed spear, he threw it. It hit home,\
          through the bronze cheek piece on Eupeithes\'92 helmet,\
          which didn\'92t stop the spear\'97the bronze point went on through.\
          Eupeithes fell down with a thud, his armour\
          crashing round him. Odysseus and his splendid son\
          charged at the fighters in the front, striking them\
[680] with swords and two-edged spears. They\'92d have killed them all,          \
          cut them down so none of them returned, had not\
          Athena, daughter of aegis-bearing Zeus, cried out\'97                         \
          her voice held back every man in that whole army.                                                         \
          \'93Men of Ithaca, stop this disastrous war,\
          so you can quickly go your separate ways\
          without spilling any blood.\'94\
          \
          Athena spoke,\
          and pale fear gripped the men. They were so terrified\
          they dropped their weapons and all fell on the ground,\
          at that goddess\'92 resounding voice. They turned round,\
          back towards the city, eager to save their lives.\
[690] Then much-enduring lord Odysseus gave out                                  \
          a fearful shout, gathered himself, and swooped down                        \
          like an eagle from on high. But at that moment,\
          Zeus, son of Cronos, shot a fiery thunderbolt.\
          It struck at the feet of the bright-eyed daughter                                                                   \
          of that mighty father. And then Athena,\
          goddess with the glittering eyes, said to Odysseus:\
          \'93Resourceful Odysseus, Laertes\'92 son,\
          and child of Zeus, hold back. Stop this fight,\
          this impartial war, in case thundering Zeus,\
[700] who sees far and wide, grows angry with you.\'94                                          \
          \
          Once Athena spoke, Odysseus obeyed,                                         \
          joy in his heart. And then Pallas Athena, \
          daughter of aegis-bearing Zeus, in shape and form\
          looking just like Mentor, had both parties swear\
          a solemn pact designed to last forever.\
}