{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf460
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural\qc

\f0\fs24 \cf0 BOOK TWO\
Telemachus Prepares for His Voyage\
          \
[Telemachus summons all the Achaeans to an assembly; Aegyptius speaks first; Telemachus complains about the suitors and threatens them; Antinous replies, blaming Penelope, describing how she has deceived the suitors, and issuing an ultimatum to Telemachus; Telemachus says he will never send his mother away; Zeus sends two eagles as an omen; Halitherses prophesies trouble for the suitors; Eurymachus replies with a threat and an ultimatum; Telemachus announces his intention of making a sea voyage; Telemachus prays to Athena, who reappears as Mentor and gives instructions for the trip; the suitors mock Telemachus; Telemachus tells Eurycleia to prepare supplies for the voyage; Athena organizes a ship and a crew for Telemachus and puts the suitors to sleep; Telemachus and the crew collect the supplies, load them onboard, and sail away from Ithaca.]\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural
\cf0           \
          As soon as rose-fingered early Dawn appeared,\
          Odysseus\'92 dear son jumped up out of bed and dressed.\
          He slung a sharp sword from his shoulders, then laced\
          his lovely sandals over his shining feet.\
          Then he left his room, his face resembling a god\'92s.\
          At once he asked the loud-voiced heralds to summon\
          all the long-haired Achaeans to assembly.\
          They issued the call, and the Achaeans came,      \
          gathering quickly. When the assembly had convened,\
  [10] Telemachus moved straight into the meeting,                                                                \
          gripping a bronze spear. He was not by himself\'97\
          two swift-footed hunting dogs accompanied him.\
          Athena cast down over him a god-like poise\'97\
          all the people were astonished at his presence,\
          as he entered and sat down in his father\'92s chair,\
          while the senior men gave way. Among those present,\
          heroic Aegyptius was the first to speak,\
          a man stooped with age, but infinitely wise.    \
          His son, the warrior Antiphus, had sailed to Troy,\
  [20] that horse-rich city, along with lord Odysseus,                                                       \
          in their hollow ships. But in his cave the wild Cyclops                      \
          had slaughtered him and made him his final meal.                                                     \
          Aegyptius had three other sons. One of them,\
          Eurynomus, was with the suitors. The other two\
          were always working in their father\'92s fields. But still,\
          Aegyptius could not forget the son who\'92d died.\
          And now, racked with grief and mourning, he shed tears\
          as he addressed them:\
          \
          \'93Men of Ithaca,\
          listen now to what I have to say. \
  [30] We have not held a general meeting                                        \
          or assembly since the day Odysseus\
          sailed off in his hollow ships. What man\
          has made us gather now? What\'92s his reason?\
          Is he a younger or a senior man?\
          Has he heard some news about the army                                             \
          and will tell us details of its journey home,\
          now that he has heard the news himself?\
          Or is it some other public business\
          he will introduce and talk about?\
  [40] He has my blessing! I pray that Zeus                                         \
          fulfils whatever he has in his heart                      \
          and makes his wishes work out for the best.\'94\
          \
          Aegyptius spoke. Odysseus\'92 dear son rejoiced\
          at such auspicious words. But he did not sit long,\
          for he was very keen to speak. So he stood up\
          in the middle of the meeting. In his hand,\
          Peisenor, a herald who provided shrewd advice,\
          placed the sceptre. Telemachus began to speak,\
          talking to Aegyptius first of all:\
          \
          \'93Old man,                              \
  [50] the one who called the people to this meeting                          \
          is not far off, as you will quickly learn.                 \
          I did. For I\'92m a man who suffers more\
          than other men. But I have no reports\
          of our returning army, no details\
          I\'92ve just heard myself to pass along to you,\
          nor is there other public business\
          I\'92ll announce or talk about. The issue here\
          is my own need, for on my household\
          troubles have fallen in a double sense.\
  [60] First, my noble father\'92s perished, the man                                \
          who was once your king and my kind father.\
          And then there\'92s an even greater problem,      \
          which will quickly and completely shatter\
          this entire house, and my whole livelihood\
          will be destroyed. These suitors, the dear sons                                     \
          of those men here with most nobility,\
          are pestering my mother against her will.\
          They don\'92t want to journey to her father,\
          Icarius, in his home, where he himself\
  [70] could set a bride price for his daughter                                     \
          and give her to the man he feels he likes,\
          the one who pleases him the most. Instead,\
          they hang around our house, day after day,\
          slaughtering oxen, fat goats, and sheep.\
          They keep on feasting, drinking sparkling wine\
          without restraint, and they consume so much.\
          There\'92s no man to guard our home from ruin,          \
          as Odysseus did before. I cannot act\
          the way he used to and avert disaster.                                                                                 \
  [80] If I tried, I would be hopeless, a man                                        \
          who had not learned what courage is. And yet,\
          if I had power, I would defend myself,\
          because we can\'92t endure what\'92s happening.\
          My home is being demolished in a way\
          that is not right. You men should be ashamed.\
          You should honour other men, your neighbours,\
          who live close by. And you should be afraid\
          of anger from the gods, in case their rage\
          at your bad acts turns them against you.\
  [90] I beg you by Olympian Zeus and Themis,                                                       \
          who summons and disperses men\'92s assemblies,\
          restrain yourselves, my friends\'97leave me alone\
          to suffer my own bitter grief, unless                                                                                \
          Odysseus, my noble father, for spite\
          has hurt well-armed Achaeans, and now,\
          in recompense for this, you angry gods\
          are harming me by urging these men on.\
          For me it would be better if you gods\
          ate up my landed property and flocks.\
[100] If you gorged yourselves, then someday soon                           \
          there might be recompense. All the time\
          you were doing that, we\'92d walk up and down,\
          throughout the city, asking for our goods\
          to be returned, until the day every piece\
          was given back. But now you load my heart\
          with pain beyond all hope.\'94\
          \
          Telemachus spoke,                          \
          then in his anger threw the sceptre on the ground\
          and burst out crying. Everyone there pitied him,\
          so all the other men kept silent, unwilling\
[110] to give an angry answer to Telemachus.                                                                       \
          Antinous was the only one to speak. He said:       \
          \
          \'93Telemachus you boaster, your spirit\
          is too unrestrained. How you carry on,\
          trying to shame us, since you so desire\
          the blame should rest on us. But in your case,\
          Achaean suitors aren\'92t the guilty ones.\
          Your own dear mother is, who understands\
          how to use deceit. It\'92s been three years now\'97\
          and soon it will be four\'97since she began\
[120] to frustrate hearts in our Achaean chests.                                        \
          She gives hope to each of us, makes promises                         \
          to everyone, and sends out messages. \
          But her intent is different. In her mind\
          she has thought up another stratagem:\
          in her room she had a large loom set up,\
          and started weaving something very big,\
          with thread that was quite thin. She said to us:\
          \
          \'91Young men, those of you who are my suitors,\
          since lord Odysseus is dead, you must wait,\
[130] although you\'92re keen for me to marry,                                          \
          till I complete this cloak\'97otherwise\
          my weaving would be wasted and in vain.\
          It is a shroud for warrior Laertes,\
          for the day a lethal fate will strike him.                                   \
          Then none of the Achaean women here\
          will be annoyed with me because a man\
          who acquired so many rich possessions\
          should lie without a shroud.\'92\
          \
          \'93That\'92s what she said.\
          And our proud hearts agreed. And so each day\
[140] she wove at her great loom, but every night                             \
          she set up torches and pulled the work apart.                                   \
          Three years she fooled Achaeans with this trick.\
          They trusted her. But as the seasons passed,\
          the fourth year came. Then one of her women\
          who knew all the details spoke about them,\
          and we caught her undoing her lovely work.\
          Thus, we forced her to complete the cloak                                                                             \
          against her will. The suitors now say this,\
          so you, deep in your heart, will understand\
[150] and all Achaeans know\'97send your mother back.                                  \
          Tell her she must marry whichever man\
          her father tells her and who pleases her.\
          But if she keeps on doing this for long,\
          teasing Achaea\'92s sons because in her heart\
          she knows that she\'92s been given by Athena,\
          more than any other woman, a skill\
          in making lovely things, a noble heart,\
          and cunning of a sort we never hear about\
          in any fair-haired woman of Achaea,\
[160] even those who lived so long ago\'97                                          \
          Tyro, Alcmene, and Mycene,                                                                                                        \
          the one who wore the lovely headband\'97\
          none of them had shrewdness which could match\
          Penelope\'92s. Yet in one thing at least\
          her scheme did not go well. Your livelihood\
          and your possessions will keep being consumed\
          as long as in her mind she follows plans\
          the gods have now put in her heart. And so,\
          while she is gaining a great reputation,\
[170] you\'92re sad about so much lost sustenance.                                                     \
          But we are not going back to our own lands,                             \
          or some place else, not until she marries\
          an Achaean man of her own choosing.\'94\
          \
          Prudent Telemachus then said in reply:\
          \
          \'93Antinous, there\'92s no way I will dismiss                                                                             \
          out of this house against her will the one\
          who bore and nursed me. As for my father,\
          he\'92s in a distant land, alive or dead. \
          It would be hard for me to compensate\
[180] Icarius with a suitable amount,                                                                                  \
          as I would have to do, if I sent her back.    \
          If I didn\'92t do that, then her father\
          would treat me badly, and some deity\
          would send other troubles, since my mother,\
          as she left this house, would call upon\
          the dreaded Furies. Men would blame me, too.\
          That\'92s why I\'92ll never issue such an order.\
          And if your heart is angry about this,\
          then leave my home, go have your feasts elsewhere.\
[190] Eat up your own possessions, changing homes,                                                  \
          one by one. But if you think it\'92s better,     \
          more in your interests, that one man\'92s goods\
          should be destroyed without repayment,\
          then use them up. But I will call upon\
          the immortal gods to ask if somehow Zeus\
          will give me retribution. Then you\'92ll die\
          here in my home and never be avenged.\'94\
          \
          Telemachus spoke. Then from a mountain peak\
          far-seeing Zeus replied by sending out two eagles,\
[200] flying high up in the sky. For some time they soared,                                     \
          like gusts of wind, with their wings spread out, side by side.\
          But when they reached the middle of the crowded meeting,                                     \
          with quick beats of their wings they wheeled around,\
          swooping down on everyone, destruction in their eyes.\
          Then with their talons they attacked each other\
          clawing head and neck, and flew off on the right,\
          past people\'92s homes, across the city. They were amazed\
          to see these birds with their own eyes. In their hearts\
          they were stirred to think how everything would end.\
          \
[210] Then old warrior Halitherses, Mastor\'92s son,                                                              \
          addressed them. He surpassed all men of his own time\
          in knowledge about birds and making prophecies\
          of what Fate had in store. Thinking of their common good,                                     \
          he spoke up and said:       \
          \
          \'93Listen to me, men of Ithaca.\
          Hear what I say. In what I\'92m going to speak,\
          I\'92m talking to the suitors most of all.\
          A mighty ruin is rolling over them.\
          For Odysseus will not be away for long\
          from his own friends. I think even now\
[220] he\'92s near by, planning a disastrous fate                                    \
          for all the suitors. And he\'92ll be a scourge\
          to many others here in sunny Ithaca.\
          Long before that we should be considering\
          how to stop this. Or rather, these suitors\
          should end it by themselves. That would achieve\
          what\'92s best for them and do so right away.\
          For I am not unskilled in prophecy\'97                                                                                  \
          I understand things well. To Odysseus\
          I say that everything is turning out\
[230] just as I told him. Back when Achaeans,                                                           \
          with resourceful Odysseus in their ranks,                                     \
          were sailing off to Troy, I prophesied\
          he\'92d suffer many troubles and would lose\
          all his companions before returning home\
          in twenty years unknown to anyone.\
          Now everything I said is coming true.\'94\
          \
          Eurymachus, Polybus\'92 son, then spoke out in reply:\
          \
          \'93Old man, you should go home and prophesy\
          to your own children, so that something bad\
[240] does not happen to them later. In these things                         \
          I can foretell events much better than you can.                                                         \
          There are lots of birds flying here and there\
          beneath the sunshine, and not all of them\
          are omens of disaster. Odysseus\
          has perished far away, and how I wish\
          you had died there with him. If you had,\
          you would not utter prophecies like these\
          or be encouraging Telemachus\
          when he\'92s enraged, in hopes you\'92ll get a gift,\
[250] some present he might give you for your house.                                      \
          But I tell you this\'97and it will happen. \
          You know many things an old man knows,\
          so if your words deceive a younger man\
          and incite him to get angry, first of all,                                                                              \
          he\'92ll be worse off, and, with these men here,\
          won\'92t have the slightest power to act.\
          And on you, old man, we\'92ll lay a penalty\
          that will pain your heart to pay\'97your sorrow\
          will be difficult to bear. But now here,\
[260] among you all, I will myself provide                                         \
          Telemachus advice. He must command\
          his mother to return home to her father.\
          They will prepare a wedding and provide\
          as many lovely presents as befit\
          a well-loved daughter. Before that happens,\
          I don\'92t think Achaea\'92s sons will end\
          their unwelcome wooing, for there\'92s no one\
          we\'92re afraid of yet\'97not Telemachus,                                                                                   \
          for all his wordiness\'97nor do we care\
[270] about a prophecy which you, old man,                                                              \
          may spout. It won\'92t come to fruition, \
          and people will despise you all the more.\
          And his possessions will be eaten up\
          in this shameful way. There will never be\
          compensation given, so long as she\
          keeps putting off Achaeans in this marriage.\
          Because she\'92s so desirable, we wait here,\
          day after day, as rivals, and don\'92t seek\
          different women, any one of whom\
[280] might be suitable for us to marry.\'94                                                                         \
          \
          Shrewd Telemachus then said in reply:\
          \
          \'93Eurymachus,\
          all you other noble suitors, no longer\
          will I make requests of you or speak of it,                                                                       \
          for gods and all Achaeans understand.\
          Just give me a swift ship and twenty rowers\'97\
          so I can make a journey and return\
          to various places, to sandy Pylos\
          and then to Sparta, to see if I can find\
          some news about my father\'92s voyage home\'97\
[290] he\'92s been gone so long\'97if any mortal man                              \
          can tell me. Or I\'92ll hear Zeus\'92 voice perhaps,                     \
          which commonly provides men information.\
          If I hear my father is still living\
          and returning home, I could hold out here\
          for one more year, although it\'92s hard for me.\
          If I learn he\'92s dead and gone, I\'92ll come back                                                                 \
          to my dear native land, build him a tomb,\
          and there perform as many funeral rites\
          as are appropriate. And after that,\
[300] I\'92ll give my mother to a husband.\'94                                                                          \
          \
          Telemachus said this, then sat down. Next Mentor,\
          who had been noble Odysseus\'92 companion,\
          stood up among them. When he\'92d sailed off in his ships,\
          Odysseus had made Mentor steward of his household,\
          charging them to follow what the old man ordered\
          and telling Mentor to keep all property secure.\
          Keeping in mind their common good, he spoke them:\
          \
          \'93Men of Ithaca, listen now to me.\
          Hear what I have to say. From now on                                                                               \
[310] let no sceptred king ever be considerate                                   \
          or kind or gentle. Let him in his heart\
          ignore what\'92s right, act with cruelty,\
          and strive for evil, for no one here,\
          none of those whom divine Odysseus ruled,\
          remembers him, yet in his role as father,\
          he was compassionate. Not that I object\
          to these proud suitors and the violent acts\
          which they, with their malicious minds, commit,\
          for they are putting their own heads at risk,\
[320] when they use force to drain Odysseus\'92 home                          \
          of its resources and claim he won\'92t come back.\
          But at this point it\'92s the other people\
          I am angry with, you who sit in silence                                                                               \
          and don\'92t say anything to criticize\
          or make the suitors stop, even though\
          there are many of you and few of them.\'94\
          \
          Then Leocritus, son of Euenor, spoke in reply:\
          \
          \'93Mentor, you mischief maker, your wits\
          have wandered off. What are you saying,\
[330] urging men to make us stop? It would be hard                         \
          to fight against those who outnumber you\'97        \
          and about a feast. Even if Odysseus,\
          king of Ithaca, were to come in person,\
          eager in his heart to drive out of his halls\
          these noble suitors eating up his home,\
          his wife would not rejoice at his arrival,\
          although she yearned for him. For if he fought\
          against so many men, then he would meet                                                                    \
          a shameful death right here. What you\'92ve just said\
[340] is quite irrelevant. So come on now,                                                                    \
          you people should disperse, each one\
          go off to his own land. As for Telemachus,\
          well, Mentor and Halitherses, comrades\
          of his ancestral house from years ago,\
          will speed him on his way. But still, I think\
          he will be sitting here a long time yet,\
          collecting his reports in Ithaca.\
          He\'92s never going to undertake that trip.\'94\
          \
          Leocritus spoke and soon dissolved the meeting.\
[350] The men dispersed, each man to his own house.                                                 \
          The suitors went inside godlike Odysseus\'92 home.\
          \
          Telemachus walked away to the ocean shore.                                                                          \
          There, once he\'92d washed his hands in grey salt water,\
          to Athena he made this prayer:\
          \
          \'93O hear me,\
          you who yesterday came to my home\
          as a god and ordered me to set out\
          on board ship across the murky seas,\
          to learn about my father\'92s voyage back\
          after being away so long. All this\
[360] Achaeans are preventing, most of all,                                                                 \
          the suitors with their wicked arrogance.\'94\
          \
          As he said this prayer, Athena came up close to him,\
          looking and sounding just like Mentor. She spoke\'97\
          her words had wings:\
          \
          \'93Telemachus,                                                                      \
          in future days you will not be worthless\
          or a stupid man, if you have in you now\
          something of your father\'92s noble spirit.\
          He\'92s the sort of man who, in word and deed,\
          saw things to their conclusion. So for you\
[370] this trip will not be useless or without result.                                               \
          If you\'92re not sprung from Penelope and him,\
          then I have no hope that you\'92ll accomplish\
          what you desire to do. It\'92s true few men\
          are like their fathers. Most of them are worse.\
          Only very few of them are better.\
          But in future you\'92ll not be unworthy\
          or a fool, and you do not completely lack\
          Odysseus\'92 wisdom, so there is some hope                                                                        \
          you will fulfil your mission. So set aside\
[380] what those foolish suitors have advised.                                                            \
          They lack all discretion, all sense of justice,\
          for they have no idea of death, the dark fate\
          closing in on them, when in a single day\
          they will all perish. You must not delay\
          that trip you wish to make. I am a friend\
          of your ancestral home, so much so that I\
          will furnish a fast ship for you and come\
          in person with you. But now you must go home.\
          Mingle with the suitors. Collect provisions,\
[390] and put everything in some containers\'97                                 \
          wine in jars and barley meal, which strengthens men,                                       \
          in thick leather sacks. I\'92ll go through the town\
          and quickly round up a group of comrades,\
          all volunteers. In sea-girt Ithaca,\
          I\'92ll choose from the many ships, new and old,\
          the best one for you, and then, when that ship\
          has been made ready and is fit to sail,\
          we\'92ll launch it out into the wine-dark sea.\'94\
          \
          Athena, Zeus\'92 daughter, finished speaking,\
[400] Telemachus did not stay there for long,                                                                        \
          once he had heard the goddess speak. He set off\
          toward his home, with a heavy heart, and there\
          he found the arrogant suitors in the palace,\
          by the courtyard, skinning goats and singeing pigs.                                                                                                                                                                                                                          \
          Antinous came up laughing at Telemachus.\
          He grabbed his hand and spoke to him:\
          \
          \'93Telemachus,\
          you\'92re such a braggart\'97an untamed spirit.\
          You should never let that heart of yours\
          entertain any further nasty words\
[410] or actions. I think you should eat and drink,                                               \
          just as you did before. Achaeans here\
          will certainly see to it you acquire\
          all the things you need\'97some hand-picked oarsmen\
          and a ship, so you can quickly travel\
          to sacred Pylos in search of some report\
          about your noble father.\'94\
          \
          Prudent Telemachus\
          then answered him and said:\
          \
          \'93Antinous,                                                                               \
          it\'92s quite impossible for me to eat\
          and stay quiet with your overbearing group\
[420] or to enjoy myself with my mind relaxed.                                                      \
          Is it not sufficient that in days past,\
          while I was still a child, you suitors\
          consumed so much of my fine property?\
          But now that I\'92ve grown up and teach myself\
          by listening to others and my spirit\
          gets stronger here inside me, I will try\
          to counteract the wicked fate you bring,\
          either by going to Pylos, or else here,\
          in this community. For I will set out,\
[430] and the voyage which I have talked about                                \
          will not be useless, even though I travel\
          as a passenger and not the master\
          of the ship or oarsmen. It seems to me\
          you think that will make things better for you.\'94                                                        \
          \
          Telemachus spoke. Then he casually pulled his hand\
          out of Antinous\'92 grasp. Meanwhile, the suitors,\
          preoccupied with feasting in the house, mocked him\
          and kept up their abusive insults. One of them,\
          an over-proud young man, would speak like this: \
          \
[440] \'93It seems Telemachus really does intend                                  \
          to murder us. He\'92ll bring men to help him\
          back from sandy Pylos or from Sparta.\
          That\'92s how terrible his resolution is.\
          Or else he wants to head off to Ephyre,\
          that rich land, so he can fetch from there\
          some lethal medicines and then throw them\
          in the wine bowl, to destroy us all.\'94                                                                                       \
          \
          And after that another proud young man would say:\
          \
          \'93Who knows whether he might die himself,\
[450] once he sets off in his hollow ship, roaming                             \
          far away from friends, just like Odysseus?\
          If so, he\'92ll provide still more work for us.\
          We\'92ll have to split up everything he owns\
          and hand this house over to his mother\
          and the man she marries.\'94\
          \
          That\'92s how the suitors talked.\
          But Telemachus just walked away, going down\
          to the high-roofed chamber which stored his father\'92s wealth,\
          an extensive place. Bronze and gold lay there in stacks,\
          with clothing packed in chests and stores of fragrant oil.\
[460] Huge jars of old sweet wine stood there\'97each one contained                  \
          drink fit for gods and not yet mixed with water\'97\
          arranged in rows along the wall, in case Odysseus,\
          after so many hardships, ever reached his home.\
          The close-fitting double doors were firmly closed,\
          and a female steward stayed there day and night,\
          protecting everything, the shrewd Eurycleia,\
          daughter of Ops, Peisenor\'92s son. Telemachus\
          called her into the storage room, then said:\
          \
          \'93Old Nurse,\
          pour some sweet wine into jars for me,\
[470] the best wine you\'92ve got after the stock                                             \
          you\'92ve planned to store here for Odysseus,\
          that ill-fated man, born from Zeus, in case,\
          after evading death and fate, he shows up\
          from somewhere. Fill twelve jars and fit them all\
          with covers. Pour me out some barley grain\
          in well-stitched leather sacks. Make sure there are\
          twenty measures of ground-up barley meal.\
          But keep this knowledge to yourself. Just get\
          all these things assembled. In the evening,\
[480] once my mother goes upstairs into her room                           \
          to get some sleep, I\'92ll come to collect them.\
          I\'92m off to sandy Pylos and to Sparta,\
          to see if I can get some information\
          about my dear father\'92s journey home,                                                                                 \
          if there is any news I can find out.\'94\
          \
          Telemachus spoke. The dear nurse Eurycleia\
          let out a cry and began to weep. Then she spoke\'97\
          her words had wings:\
          \
          \'93O my dear child,\
          how did this thought gain entry to your heart?\
[490] Where on this wide earth do you intend to roam,                                  \
          with you an only son and so well loved?\
          In some distant land among strange people\
          Odysseus, a man born from Zeus, has died.\
          As soon as you have gone from here, the suitors\
          will start their wicked schemes to hurt you later\'97\
          how they can have you killed by trickery\
          and then parcel out among themselves\
          all your possessions. You must stay here\
          to guard what\'92s yours. You don\'92t need to suffer\
[500] what comes from wandering on the restless sea.\'94                                            \
          \
          Shrewd Telemachus then answered her and said:\
          \
          \'93Be brave, dear nurse, for I have not planned this\
          without help from a god. But you must swear\
          you won\'92t mention this to my dear mother,\
          until eleven or twelve days from now,\
          or until she misses me or learns I\'92ve gone,\
          so she does not mar her lovely face with tears.\'94\
          \
          Once Telemachus said this, the old woman swore\
          a mighty oath by all the gods she\'92d tell no one.\
[510] When she had sworn and the oath had been completed,                 \
          she went immediately to pour wine into jars\
          and fill the well-stitched leather sacks with barley meal.                                               \
          Telemachus went up into the dining hall\
          and there rejoined the company of suitors.\
          \
          Then goddess Athena with the gleaming eyes\
          thought of something else. Looking like Telemachus,\
          she went all through the city. To every man\
          she came across to she gave the same instructions,\
          telling them to meet by the fast ship that evening.\
[520] Next, she asked Noemon, fine son of Phronius,                               \
          for a swift ship, and he was happy to oblige.\
          Then the sun went down, and all the roads grew dark.\
          Athena dragged the fast ship down into the sea\
          and stocked it with supplies, all the materials                                                                           \
          well-decked boats have stowed on board, then moved the ship\
          to the harbour\'92s outer edge. There they assembled,\
          that group of brave companions, and the goddess\
          instilled fresh spirit in them all. Then Athena,\
          goddess with the glittering eyes, thought of one more thing.\
[530] She set off, going to noble Odysseus\'92 home.                                                             \
          There she poured sweet drowsiness on all the suitors.\
          She made them wander round as they were drinking\
          and knocked the cups out of their hands. When sleep\
          fell down across their eyelids, the suitors felt an urge\
          not to stay sitting there for any length of time,\
          but to get themselves some rest down in the city.\
          Then bright-eyed Athena told Telemachus\
          to come outside, by the entrance to the spacious hall.                                                     \
          In her voice and form she resembled Mentor:\
          \
[540] \'93Telemachus, your well-armed companions                             \
          are already sitting beside their oars,\
          waiting for you to launch the expedition.\
          Let\'92s be off, so we don\'92t delay the trip\
          a moment longer.\'94                       \
          \
          With these words, Pallas Athena\
          quickly led the way, and Telemachus followed\
          in her footsteps. Once they\'92d come down to the sea\
          and reached the ship, on shore they came across\
          their long-haired companions. Telemachus spoke to them\
          with strength and power:\
          \
          \'93Come, my friends, let\'92s gather                                                    \
[550] our supplies. They\'92ve already been assembled,                                          \
          all together in the hall. My mother\
          knows nothing of all this, and neither do\
          any other women of the household.\
          I\'92ve mentioned this to only one of them.\'94\
          \
          After saying this, Telemachus led them away,\
          and the group then followed. They carried everything\
          to the well-decked ship and stowed it all in place,\
          as Odysseus\'92 dear son instructed them to do.\
          Then, with Athena going on board ahead of him,\
[560] Telemachus embarked. She sat in the stern.                                                             \
          Telemachus sat right beside her, as the men      \
          untied the stern ropes, then climbed aboard the ship\
          and went to seat themselves beside their oarlocks.\
          Bright-eyed Athena arranged a fair breeze for them,                                                       \
          a strong West Wind blowing across the wine-dark sea.\
          Telemachus then called out to his companions\
          to set their hands to the ship\'92s rigging. Once they heard,\
          they went to work, raising the mast cut out of fir,\
          setting it in its hollow socket, securing it\
[570] with forestays, and hoisting the white sail aloft                                \
          with twisted ox-hide thongs. The belly of the sail\
          filled up with wind, and the ship sailed on its way.\
          As it sliced straight through the swell on its way forward,\
          around the bow began the great song of the waves.\
          When they had lashed the rigging on that fast black ship,                                           \
          they set out bowls brimful of wine and poured libations\
          to the eternal ageless gods, and of them all\
          especially to Athena, Zeus\'92 bright-eyed daughter.\
          Then all night long and well beyond the sunrise,\
[580] their ship continued sailing on its journey.                                                                }