{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf460
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs36 \cf0 BOOK THREE\
TELEMACHUS VISITS NESTOR IN PYLOS\
          \
[Telemachus and his crew reach Pylos and are welcomed by Nestor; Nestor describes events at Troy and on the voyage home; Nestor gives an account of Aegisthus\'92 plan to seduce Clytaemnestra and murder Agamemnon; Nestor sacrifices to Poseidon, then invites Athena and Telemachus to stay the night with him; Athena declines, but Telemachus goes with Nestor; Nestor and his sons offer a sacrifice to Athena; Polycaste gives Telemachus a bath; Nestor orders a chariot; Telemachus and Peisistratus leave Pylos, spend the night in Pherae, then continue their journey.\uc0\u63743 \
          \
          When the sun had left the splendid sea and risen up\
          into an all-bronze heaven, giving light to gods\
          and mortal men and grain to farmers\'92 fields,\
          the ship and crew reached Pylos, a well-built city\
          ruled by Nestor. There by the sea the city folk\
          were preparing black bulls as holy offerings\
          to Poseidon, dark-haired Shaker of the Earth.1 \
          There were nine groups, each with five hundred people\
          and nine offerings of bulls ready to sacrifice.\
  [10] As they were tasting samples of the innards                                     \
          and cooking thigh parts for the gods, the ship and crew\
          were heading straight for shore. They hauled in and furled                                      \
          the sails on their trim ship, moored it, and disembarked.\
          With Athena showing him the way, Telemachus\
          stepped from the ship. The bright-eyed goddess spoke to him:\
          \
          \'93Telemachus, no need to feel embarrassed,\
          not in the least, for this is why you\'92ve sailed\
          across the sea, to get information\
          about your father\'97where he is buried\
  [20] and what fate has befallen him. Come now,                                                \
          go directly to horse-taming Nestor.\
          Let\'92s find out what advice his heart contains.\
          You yourself must beg him to report the truth.\
          He will not lie, for he is truly wise.\'94                                                                                      \
          \
          Prudent Telemachus then answered her and said:\
          \
          \'93Mentor, how shall I go up there and greet him?\
          I\'92ve had no practice with such formal speech.\
          And then, when a young man seeks to question\
          an older one, that could bring him shame.\'942\
          \
  [30] Athena, goddess with the gleaming eyes, then said:                                          \
          \
          \'93Telemachus, your heart will think of something,\
          and power from heaven will provide the rest.\
          For I don\'92t think that you were born and raised\
          without being favoured by the gods.\'94\
          \
          She spoke.\
          Pallas Athena then quickly led them off.\
          Telemachus followed in the goddess\'92 footsteps.                                                                     \
          They reached the group of Pylians gathered there,\
          where Nestor sat among his sons. Around them\
          his companions were preparing for the feast,\
  [40] cooking meat and setting other pieces onto spits.                                               \
          When they saw the strangers, they came thronging round,\
          clasping their hands and inviting them to sit.\
          Nestor\'92s son Peisistratus approached them first,\
          took Athena and Telemachus both by the hand,\
          and asked them to sit on soft cushions and eat\
          beside his brother Thrasymedes and his father\
          on the beach. He gave them portions of the innards,\
          and then into a cup of gold he poured some wine.                                                            \
          He made a toast to Pallas Athena, daughter\
  [50] of aegis-bearing Zeus, then said to her:3                                                                        \
          \
           \'93Stranger, you must now pray to lord Poseidon,\
          for the feast which you have chanced upon\
          is in his honour. When you have offered\
          your libation and have prayed, as is right,\
          hand your comrade the cup of honey wine,\
          so he can pour out his libation, too,\
          for he looks like someone who offers prayers\
          to the immortals. All men need the gods.\
          Since he\'92s a younger man of my own age,\
  [60] I\'92ll start by giving you this golden cup.\'94                                                                        \
          \
          Saying this, he set the cup of sweet wine in her hand.\
          Athena rejoiced at such a wise and righteous man,\
          because he had offered the gold cup to her first.\
          At once she made a solemn prayer to lord Poseidon:\
          \
          \'93Hear me, Poseidon, you who enfold the earth\'97\
          do not hold back from bringing to fulfilment\
          those events we pray for. And to begin with,\
          give Nestor and his sons a glorious name,\
          and then grant all other men of Pylos\
  [70] a pleasing recompense in answer to                                         \
          these lovely offerings. And in addition,\
          grant that Telemachus and I get back,\
          once we have accomplished all those things                                                                 \
          for which we came here in our swift black ship.\'94\
          \
          That\'92s the prayer Athena uttered then, while she herself\
          was taking care that everything would work out well.\
          She gave Telemachus the fine two-handled cup.\
          Odysseus\'92 brave son then made a prayer like hers.\
          Once they\'92d finished roasting the upper cuts of meat\
  [80] and pulled them off the spits, they served out portions                    \
          and had a sumptuous feast. When every one of them\
          had taken food and drink to his own heart\'92s content,\
          Nestor, the Geranian horseman, began to speak:4\
          \
           \'93It seems to me that it\'92s a good time now\
          to ask our guests to tell us who they are,\
          now they\'92ve enjoyed our food. And so, strangers,                                                  \
          who are you? What country did you sail from,\
          when you set your course across the water?\
          Are you on business? Or are you roaming\
  [90] on the seas at random, like those pirates                                  \
          who sail around, risking their own lives,\
          posing a threat to men from other lands?\'94\
          \
          Then shrewd Telemachus spoke up in reply,\
          and boldly, too, for Athena herself had put\
          courage in his heart, so he might talk about\
          his absent father and acquire for himself\
          a noble reputation:\
          \
          \'93Nestor, son of Neleus,\
          great glory of Achaeans, you asked us\
          where we come from, so I\'92ll tell you.                                                                                   \
[100] We\'92re from Ithaca below Mount Neion.                                                           \
          My business, which I\'92ll speak about, is private,\
          not a public matter. I am pursuing\
          wide-spread rumours of the brave Odysseus,\
          my father, who, they say, fought at your side\
          and utterly destroyed the Trojans\'92 city.\
          We have heard reports about the others,\
          all those who went to war against the Trojans\'97\
          where each met his bitter fate\'97but Zeus,\
          son of Cronos, has made Odysseus\'92 death\
[110] something unknown, for none of us can say                            \
          with any confidence where he was killed,\
          whether he was overwhelmed by enemies                                                                      \
          on land or killed at sea by waves stirred up\
          by Amphitrite.5 That\'92s why I have come\
          to sit now in your home, for there\'92s a chance\
          you could tell me something of his death,\
          which you may have seen with your own eyes.\
          Or perhaps you\'92ve heard about his wanderings\
          from someone else. For his mother bore him\
[120] to go through trouble more than other men.                                               \
          Do not pity me or, from compassion,\
          just offer me words of consolation,\
          but tell me truly how you chanced to see him.\
          If my father, brave Odysseus, in word or deed,\
          ever promised you something and kept his word,\
          way over there among the Trojans,\
          where Achaeans suffered such distress,                                                                              \
          I ask you now\'97remember what he did,\
          and give me the truth.\'94\
          \
          Responding to Telemachus,\
          Geranian horseman Nestor said:\
          \
[130] \'93My friend,                              \
          you make me call to mind the suffering\
          and boundless courage of Achaea\'92s sons\
          in all they went through over there, the things\
          we had to endure while on board the ships,\
          as we roamed across the misty waters,\
          in search of loot, with Achilles in the lead,\
          and all the fights around great Priam\'92s city,\
          where so many of our finest men were killed.6\
          That\'92s where warlike Ajax and Achilles lie,\
[140] and Patroclus, too, a man whose counsel                                           \
          was like the gods\'92. My own dear son fell there,\
          Antilochus, as strong as he was noble,\
          outstanding for his speed and fighting skill.\
          And we endured countless other hardships\
          apart from these. Who could possibly describe\
          every detail of the men who perished?\
          If you were to spend five or six years here\
          questioning me about the brave Achaeans\
          and the troubles they went through, you\'92d grow tired\
[150] and sail back home well before I\'92d finished.                                                 \
          Nine years we spent scheming to bring them down\
          with every sort of trick, but Cronos\'92 son\
          made all our plans so hard to carry out.\
          Over there no one ever tried to claim                                                                                \
          he could match Odysseus\'92 shrewd advice.\
          In devising every kind of devious scheme\
          he was easily the best, your father,\
          if indeed you are his son. Looking at you,\
          I am astonished, for you really speak\
[160] the way he did. No one would ever think                                 \
          a younger man could talk so much like him.\
          All that time back then, never once did I\
          and lord Odysseus, in council or assembly,\
          disagree. We spoke with a single heart\
          and gave the Argives wise and useful views\
          about how those events would best turn out.\
          But when Priam\'92s towering city was destroyed                                                                                                                                                                                                             \
          and our ships set off, the Achaean fleet\
          was scattered by some god. And even so,\
[170] Zeus planned in his heart to give Achaeans                              \
          a sorrowful return. They had not been wise\
          or righteous, so many met a nasty fate,\
          thanks to the mortal anger of Athena,\
          bright-eyed goddess with a mighty father.\
          She incited the two sons of Atreus\
          to quarrel with each other. The two men\
          had quickly called Achaeans to assembly,\
          not in the usual way, but at sunset.\
          Achaea\'92s sons arrived all flushed with wine.\
[180] Both kings delivered speeches. They explained                                  \
          why they had called the meeting. Menelaus\
          told Achaeans to plan on going home\
          on the broad back of the sea. What he said\
          did not please Agamemnon in the least,\
          because he wished to keep the army there,\
          so they could all offer sacrifices\
          to appease Athena\'92s dreadful anger.\
          The fool! He didn\'92t know there was no chance\
          that she was going to hear what he would say.\
[190] For the minds of gods, who live forever,                                                          \
          are not altered quickly. So these two men\
          stood there, trading hard words with each other.\
          The armed Achaeans jumped up on their feet,\
          making an amazing noise. Two different plans                                                        \
          were popular among them, and that night\
          no one slept, as both sides kept arguing,\
          each one with harsh opinions of the other,\
          for Zeus was bringing us a wretched fate.\
          In the morning, some of us dragged our ships\
[200] down to the sparkling sea, put goods on board\'97                     \
          our women, too, who wore their girdles low.\
          But half the soldiers stayed, remaining there\
          with Agamemnon, son of Atreus,\
          shepherd of his army. So half of us\
          embarked and rowed away. Our ships moved fast\'97\
          some god had made the yawning sea grow calm.\
          We came to Tenedos and sacrificed\
          to all the gods, still keen to get back home.7\
          But even then Zeus had not decided                                                                                     \
[210] to let us all return\'97a stubborn god!                                                                     \
          He stirred up a second vicious quarrel.\
          So some men turned their curving ships around\
          and sailed back, among them lord Odysseus,\
          that wise and cunning man, with his soldiers.\
          Once again he favoured Agamemnon,\
          son of Atreus. Then I fled away\
          with the remaining ships, which followed me.\
          I knew a god was planning something bad.\
          And Diomedes, warrior son of Tydeus,\
[220] urged his comrades on to act as we did.                                                            \
          Fair-haired Menelaus and his ships\
          sailed later. They caught up with us at Lesbos.\
          We\'92d been arguing about the major stretch\'97\
          should we sail to the north of rugged Chios                                                                  \
          towards the island of Psyria, keeping\
          Chios on our left, or take the southern route,\
          below Chios and past stormy Mimas.\
          So we asked a god to give us a sign.\
          He did and ordered us to carve our way\
[230] across the great sea straight to Euboea\'97                                  \
          that way we would escape from trouble\
          as quickly as we could.8 A blustery wind\
          began to blow, and so our ships moved fast\
          across the fish-filled seas. That very night\
          we landed at Geraestus, where we offered\
          many bulls\'92 thighs to Poseidon, our thanks\
          for crossing the great sea. On the fourth day,\
          the crews of Diomedes, son of Tydeus,\
          tamer of horses, berthed their well-built ships                                                           \
[240] in Argos, but I sailed on to Pylos.9                                                                                                               \
          Once a god sent that wind to blow us home,\
          it never once let up. And so, my lad,\
          I made it back. But of the Achaeans\'97\
          the ones who died and those who got back home\'97\
          I didn\'92t learn a thing. I just don\'92t know.\
          But what I have found out, as I\'92ve sat here,\
          in my own home, you\'92ll hear. You have that right.\
          I\'92ll not conceal it from you. People say\
          great spear-fighting Myrmidons reached home safely,\
[250] led by the glorious son of brave Achilles,                                                         \
          as did the noble son of Poias, too,\
          Philoctetes. And Idomeneus also\
          took all his comrades back to Crete, the ones                                                             \
          who\'92d made it through the war. Not one of them\
          was lost at sea. As for Agamemnon,\
          although you live a long way off, you\'92ve heard\
          of his return\'97how he came home and then\
          how Aegisthus planned his cruel slaughter.\
          He later paid a terrible reckoning.\
[260] That\'92s why it\'92s good for any murdered man                              \
          to leave a worthy son. For Orestes                                                  \
          got his revenge against his father\'92s killer,\
          sly Aegisthus, who\'92d killed Agamemnon,\
          that splendid man. And you, my friend, I see\
          that you\'92re a strong, fine-looking man,\
          but you must act with courage, so those born\
          in future years will say good things of you.\'94                                             \
          \
          Shrewd Telemachus then said in reply:\
          \
          \'93Nestor,\
          son of Neleus, great glory of Achaeans,\
[270] yes, indeed, that son got his revenge.                                                                  \
          Achaeans all will celebrate his fame\
          and sing of it to men in years to come.\
          If gods would only give me strength like that,\
          so I could pay these haughty suitors back\'97\
          they bring me such distress. In all their pride\
          they keep on plotting wretched things for me.\
          But happiness like that the gods deny me,\
          me and my father. But now, in spite of that,\
          I must keep going.\'94\
          \
          Geranian horseman Nestor                                                       \
          then said to Telemachus:                                                                           \
          \
[280] \'93My friend,                         \
          since you mentioned this and made me think of it,\
          they say that many suitors in your home,\
          seeking to become your mother\'92s husband,\
          keep devising wicked schemes against you,\
          over your objections. So tell me this\'97\
          are you being oppressed with your consent?\
          Or in response to what some god has said,\
          have people turned against you? Who knows\
          whether Odysseus will return some day\
[290] to pay them back for all their violence,                                                             \
          either alone or with a combined force\
          of all Achaeans? Ah, how I wish\
          Athena with her bright eyes were willing\
          to cherish you the way she cared back then\
          for fine Odysseus in the land of Troy,                                                                                \
          where we Achaeans had to undergo\
          such grievous times. For I have never seen\
          the gods display their love so openly\
          as Pallas Athena did supporting him.\
[300] If she was keen to love you in that way                                     \
          and to take you to her heart, those suitors\
          would soon forget about the marriage.\'94\
          \
          Shrewd Telemachus then answered Nestor, saying:\
          \
          \'93Old man, I don\'92t think what you\'92ve described\
          will ever happen. What you have said\
          is too much to expect. I am surprised\
          you mention it. I entertain no hopes\
          that it could happen to me, even if\
          the gods themselves were willing.\'94\
          \
          Then Athena,\
          bright-eyed goddess, answered him:\
          \
[310] \'93Telemachus,                              \
          what a speech just passed the barrier of your teeth!\
          A god could easily bring someone home\
          from a long way off, if he wanted to.\
          But I\'92d prefer to go through many hardships\
          and then see the day when I got back\
          and reached my home, than to complete my trip\
          only to be butchered by my own hearth,\
          the way that Agamemnon was cut down,\
          tricked by his own wife and by Aegisthus.\
[320] But the gods cannot protect a man from death\'97                     \
          which comes to all\'97even ones they love,\
          once the destroying fate of a harsh doom\
          has seized him.\'94\
          \
          Shrewd Telemachus\
          then said in answer to Athena:\
          \
          \'93Mentor,\
          although we\'92re sad, let\'92s not discuss this further.                                                      \
          For him there\'92ll be no more returning home.\
          No. For by this time the immortal gods\
          have planned some dismal fate for him. I\'92d like\
          to change the subject and ask Nestor something.\
[330] He\'92s a righteous and intelligent man,                                                                  \
          more so than others. He\'92s been king, they say,\
          over three human generations. To me,\
          as I look at him, he seems immortal.\
          O Nestor, son of Neleus, tell me the truth.\
          How did wide-ruling Agamemnon,\
          son of Atreus, meet his death? And where\
          was Menelaus? As for Aegisthus,\
          that deceitful man, what did he devise\
          to kill a man much finer than himself?\
[340] Was Menelaus not in Achaean Argos,                                                                         \
          but wandering around some foreign land?\
          Was that what made Aegisthus brave enough\
          to carry out the killing?\'94\
          \
          Geranian horseman Nestor\
          then answered Telemachus and said:\
          \
          \'93My boy,\
          I\'92ll tell you all this and speak frankly, too.\
          You yourself obviously understand\
          what would have taken place if Menelaus,\
          Atreus\'92 fair-haired son, had come home\
          from Troy and found Aegisthus living there,\
[350] in his own house. He would have killed the man.                                   \
          No one would have heaped up a tomb for him\'97\
          he\'92d have been eaten by the dogs and birds,\
          as he lay on the plain outside the city.                                                                                \
          And not one of the Achaean women\
          would have lamented him, the one who planned\
          the monstrous act. We were over there in Troy,\
          fighting hard in battle after battle,\
          while he was having a good time, tucked away\
          in horse-breeding Argos, seeking to seduce\
[360] the wife of Agamemnon with his talk.                                                                \
          Lady Clytaemnestra at first turned down\
          such a repulsive crime, for she possessed\
          a noble heart. Besides, she had with her\
          a singer whom the son of Atreus\
          had firmly charged to watch out for his wife,\
          when he\'92d embarked for Troy. But when fate\
          sent from the gods caught her and she succumbed,\
          Aegisthus took that singer far away,                                                                                     \
          to a deserted island, and left him there,\
[370] a trophy for the birds to prey upon.                                                                      \
          And when he wished to take her to his home,\
          she agreed to go. Then Aegisthus burned\
          many thigh cuts on the holy altars\
          sacred to the gods and offered up\
          all sorts of treasure, woven goods and gold,\
          for he had managed a tremendous act,\
          something his heart had never dreamed of.\
          Well, once we\'92d left Troy, we sailed together,\
          Menelaus and myself. At the time,\
[380] our relationship was very friendly.                                                                         \
          But when we came to holy Sunium,\
          the Athenian headland, Phoebus Apollo\
          with his gentle shafts struck down and killed                                                              \
          Menelaus\'92 helmsman, Phrontis,\
          Onetor\'92s son, as he gripped the steering oar\
[10on the swift-moving ship. He was a man\
          preeminent among the tribes of men\
          in piloting a ship through stormy winds.\
          Now, though Menelaus was still very keen\
[390] to keep going on his trip, he stayed there,                                                      \
          to bury his companion and provide\
          the funeral rites. But when he re-launched\
          his hollow ships upon the wine-dark sea\
          and quickly reached the steep crag of Malea,\
          then far-seeing Zeus carried out a scheme\
          to make his voyage dreadful. He sent down\
          blasting winds and immense waves, like mountains.                                          \
          Once he split Menelaus\'92 fleet in two,\
          Zeus pushed some to Crete, where Cyndians live\
[400] beside banks of the river Iardanus.                                                                        \
          There\'92s a steep cliff there, a rock facing the sea\
          right in the misty surf, on Gortyn\'92s borders,\
          where the South-West Wind smashes mighty waves\
          against the promontory on the left,\
          by Phaestus. A small rock in that spot holds back\
          the mighty waves. Some of his ships came there.\
          After making desperate efforts, the men\
          escaped destruction, but on that rock\
          the ships were smashed to pieces by the waves.\
[410] The wind then drove five other dark-nosed ships                     \
          over the waves and carried them to Egypt,                                                                    \
          where Menelaus and his ships then sailed\
          among some folk who spoke a foreign language,\
          gathering plentiful supplies and gold,\
          while at home Aegisthus planned the murder.\
          After he had killed the son of Atreus,\
          he ruled gold-rich Mycenae seven years.\
          Under his kingship people were oppressed.\
          But in the eighth year brave Orestes came\
[420] back from Athens\'97bad news for Aegisthus.                                                \
          Orestes slew his father\'92s murderer,\
          sly Aegisthus, because he had cut down\
          his famous father. Once he\'92d killed the man,\
          he held a funeral feast for all the Argives,\
          in remembrance of his hateful mother\
          and cowardly Aegisthus. That same day,                                                                          \
          Menelaus, so good at battle shouts,\
          arrived, bringing large amounts of treasure,\
          as much cargo as his ships could carry.\
[430] So now, my friend, you must not wander off                            \
          and stay away from home too long, leaving\
          your possessions there, with such arrogant men\
          in your own house, in case they take over\
          all your wealth or eat it up. That would make\
          your voyage here quite useless. I\'92d urge you\'97\
          and this I strongly recommend\'97to go\
          to Menelaus. For he\'92s just come home\
          from foreign places very recently,\
          when no one in his heart had any hope\
[440] he might be returning from those people.                                                      \
          For stormy winds had driven him off course                                                                \
          at first, into a sea so large that birds\
          take a year or more to fly back from there.\
          That\'92s how huge and terrifying it is.\
          But you and your companions should leave now\
          in your ship. If you\'92d like to go by land,\
[11there are chariots and horses here for you.\
          My sons will help, as well, and be your guides\
          to fair-haired Menelaus, where he lives\
[450] in noble Sparta. Make sure you ask him                                   \
          to speak to you and to be quite candid.\
          He will not lie, for he is far too wise.\'94\
          \
          As Nestor finished, the sun was going down,\
          with darkness coming on. So Athena,                                                                                              \
          the bright-eyed goddess, said to them:\
          \
          \'93Old man,\
          what you\'92ve just said is true and relevant.\
          But now you should slice out the victims\'92 tongues\
          and mix the wine, so we can make libations\
          to lord Poseidon and to other gods,\
[460] and then think of rest. It\'92s that time of day.                                                 \
          For now the light has slid below the darkness,\
          and it\'92s not right for us to linger here\
          at a banquet for the gods. We must get back.\'94\
          \
          Zeus\'92 daughter spoke, and they heard what she had said.\
          Heralds poured out water for them to wash their hands,\
          and young boys filled up wine bowls to the brim with drink,\
          served everyone, pouring wine out in the cups,                                                                    \
          the first drops for libations. They threw the bulls\'92 tongues\
          on the fire and, standing up, poured out their offerings.\
[470] That tribute made, they drank wine to their heart\'92s content.                  \
          Then both Athena and godlike Telemachus\
          wished to get back to their hollow ship. But Nestor,\
          wanting them to stay, appealed to them and said:\
          \
          \'93Zeus and other eternal gods forbid\
          that you should leave my home for your fast ship\
          as if you were departing from a man\
          who has no clothes or wealth, some pauper,\
          whose home has no rich store of cloaks or blankets\
          to give him and his guests a gentle sleep.                                                                        \
[480] No. My house has coverlets and lovely rugs.                                                \
          Surely the dear son of brave Odysseus\
          will not lie down to sleep on a ship\'92s deck,\
          not while I\'92m alive and still have children\
          left in my own halls to welcome strangers,\
          whoever visits me in my own home.\'94\
          \
          Athena, bright-eyed goddess, then answered Nestor:\
          \
          \'93No doubt what you have said, old friend, is wise,\
          and Telemachus should follow your advice.\
          It would be far better if he did. But now,\
[490] when he goes back with you to get some sleep                         \
          in your own home, I\'92ll go to our black ship,                                                                 \
          to rally the morale of our companions\
          and tell them everything. Among our group\
          I\'92m the only one who can make the claim\
          that I\'92m an older man. The rest are young,\
          all the same age as brave Telemachus.\
          They follow us because they are our friends.\
          I\'92ll lie down on the black hollow ship tonight\
          and in the morning go to the Caucones,\
[500] where there\'92s an old debt they still owe me,                                                 \
          not a small amount. Since Telemachus\
          has visited your home, give him horses,\
          the strongest and the fastest ones you have,\
          and send him off in a chariot with your son.\'94                                                             \
          \
          Gleaming-eyed Athena said these words and left,\
          taking on the form of a sea eagle. Amazement\
          gripped all the Achaeans. And the old man, too,\
          was astonished as his eyes took in the sight.\
          He grabbed Telemachus\'92 hand and said to him:\
          \
[510] \'93My friend, I don\'92t think you\'92ll turn out to be                           \
          a bad or feeble man, if gods follow you\
          to be your guide, when you\'92re so very young.\
          Of all those who live on Mount Olympus,\
          that is none other than Zeus\'92 daughter,\
          the glorious Tritogeneia, the god\
          who held your splendid father in such honour\
[12among the Argives. But now, dear goddess,\
          be gracious and give me a noble fame,                                                                              \
          me, my children, and the wife I cherish.\
[520] And in return I\'92ll sacrifice to you                                              \
          a broad-faced heifer, still unbroken,\
          which no man yet has put beneath the yoke.\
          I\'92ll offer her to you with gold-wrapped horns.\'94\
          \
          Nestor spoke this prayer, and Pallas Athena heard him.\
          Then Geranian horseman Nestor led them away,\
          with his sons and sons-in-law, to his lovely home.\
          Once they reached the splendid palace of the king,\
          they sat down in rows on high-backed chairs and couches.\
          When they\'92d all come in, the old man mixed for them                                                 \
[530] a bowl of sweet wine ten years old, which his steward                     \
          opened after loosening the lid. The old man\
          had some of it mixed in a bowl, and then poured out\
          libations, as he prayed in earnest to Athena,\
          daughter of aegis-bearing Zeus. Others did the same.\
          Then they drank wine to their heart\'92s content and left,\
          each to his own home, to get some sleep. Nestor,\
          the Geranian horseman, told Telemachus,\
          godlike Odysseus\'92 dear son, to sleep right there,\
          on a corded bed in the echoing corridor,\
[540] with spear-fighter Peisistratus, leader of men,                                                                 \
          there with him in the palace. Of all his sons\
          he was the only one as yet unmarried.\
          Nestor himself slept in an inner chamber\
          inside the high-roofed house, with his noble wife,\
          who had prepared the bed, lying down beside him.\
          \
          As soon as rose-fingered early Dawn appeared,\
          Geranian horseman Nestor got up out of bed,\
          went outside, and sat down before his high white doors\
          on polished stones, which glistened, as if rubbed with oil.\
[550] Neleus in earlier times used to sit on them,                                                              \
          a man whose wise advice was equal to the gods.\
          But Fate had overtaken him by now. He\'92d gone                                                                   \
          to Hades, so now Geranian horseman Nestor,\
          protector of Achaeans, sat on those stones,\
          a sceptre in his hand. His sons came from their rooms\
          and gathered round him in a throng\'97Echephron,\
          Stratius, Perseus, Aretus, and godlike Thrasymedes.\
          Then the sixth son joined them, warrior Peisistratus.\
          They brought in godlike Telemachus, asking him\
[560] to sit among them. Geranian horseman Nestor                               \
          then began to speak to them:\
          \
          \'93My dear children,\
          you must act on my desires, and quickly,\
          so I can propitiate Athena,\
          before the other gods. She came to me\
          in manifest form, at Poseidon\'92s feast.                                                                                 \
          So come\'97one of you must fetch a heifer\
          out there in the plain. And to guarantee\
          the beast gets here as quickly as it can,\
          have the cattle herder drive it to me.\
[570] Then someone must set off for the black ship                          \
          of brave Telemachus and bring back\
          all his companions, leaving only two.\
          And tell the goldsmith Laerces to come,\
          so he can wrap the heifer\'92s horns with gold.\
          All the rest of you stay here together.\
          Inform the inside household servants\
          to prepare a fine banquet in the house,\
          with chairs and logs set all around. Make sure\
          they bring fresh water.\'94\
          \
          Once Nestor finished speaking,                                                   \
[580] the men all set to work. The heifer from the plain                           \
          was driven in, and brave Telemachus\'92 comrades\
          arrived from their fine ship. The goldsmith came, as well,\
          gripping the bronze tools he needed for his trade,\
          an anvil, hammer, and well-crafted tongs, the things\
          he used to work the gold. And Athena also came,\
          ready to receive the sacrifice. Then Nestor,\
          the old chariot fighter, produced the gold. The smith\
          worked it into a rich design and wrapped it\
          around the heifer\'92s horns, so that the goddess,\
[590] when she saw the offering, would rejoice. Stratius                           \
          and noble Echephron led in the heifer by the horns,\
          as Aretus entered from an inner room,                                                                                         \
          bringing water in a basin etched with flowers\
          for them to wash their hands. In his other hand\
          he brought in a basket filled with barley grains.\
          Steadfast Thrasymedes stood holding a sharp axe\
          to cut down the heifer. And Perseus held a bowl\
          to catch the victim\'92s blood. Then old man Nestor,\
          the chariot fighter, began the ritual washing\
[600] and sprinkled barley grains, intoning many prayers                        \
          to Athena. Then, as the initial offering,\
          from the beast\'92s head he cut off a single hair\
          and threw it on the fire. When they\'92d made their prayers\
          and scattered barley grains, then Thrasymedes,\
          Nestor\'92s daring son, approached the animal\
          and struck it. The axe sliced through sinews on its neck,\
          and the spirit of the beast ebbed out. The women\'97\
          Nestor\'92s daughters, his sons\'92 wives, his cherished wife,                                                  \
          Eurydice, eldest daughter of Clymenus\'97                        \
[610] raised the sacred cry, as the men then lifted up                                \
          the animal\'92s head above the much-travelled earth.\
          Peisistratus, leader of men, slit its throat,\
          and its black blood flowed. The spirit left its bones.\
          They carved the body quickly, cutting thigh bones out,\
          all in proper order, and then covered them up\
          in a double fold of fat and set raw meat on top.\
          Next, the old man burned the pieces on split wood\
          and poured gleaming wine on them. Beside Nestor\
          stood young men holding five-pronged forks. Once the thighs                             \
[620] had been completely burned and they\'92d sampled innards,                        \
          they cut up the remaining meat, placed it on spits,\
          and held the pointed skewers on the fire.\
          \
          Then lovely Polycaste, youngest daughter\
          of Nestor, son of Neleus, bathed Telemachus.\
          When the bath was finished, she rubbed him with rich oil\
          and gave him a tunic and fine cloak to wear.\
          Coming from his bath, he looked just like a god.\
          He went and sat by Nestor, the people\'92s shepherd.\
          \
          When they had cooked the upper cuts of meat                                                                      \
[630] and pulled them off the spits, they sat and ate.                                                      \
          The servers were distinguished men, who poured the wine\
          in goblets made of gold. Once they had all eaten\
          their fill of food and drink, Geranian horseman Nestor\
          was the first to speak. He said:\
          \
          \'93Come now, my sons,\
          hitch up some fine-maned horses to a chariot,\
          so Telemachus can start his journey.\'94\
          \
          Nestor spoke. They heard and carried out his orders,\
          eagerly and quickly harnessing swift horses\
          onto the chariot. In it a servant woman\
[640] stored bread and wine and special delicacies,                                                          \
          assortments that those kings Zeus cherishes                                                                              \
          eat with delight. Then Telemachus climbed up\
          inside the splendid chariot, and Nestor\'92s son\
          Peisistratus, leader of men, stepped up\
          beside him in the chariot, grabbed the reins,\
          and then cracked the whip. The pair of horses\
          raced willingly across the plain, leaving\
          the steep citadel of Pylos. All day long\
          they rattled the yoke and harness on their necks.\
[650] Then the sun set, and darkness covered all the roads.                                    \
          They reached the home of Diocles in Pherae.\
          He was Ortilochus\'92 son, whose father\
          was Alpheus, and there they spent the night.                                                                           \
          Diocles offered them the hospitality\
          he owed to strangers who stayed there as his guests.\
          \
          As soon as rose-fingered early Dawn appeared,\
          they hitched their horses, climbed in the splendid chariot,\
          and set off from the echoing portico and gate.\
          With a touch of the whip, the horses raced along,\
[660] eager to run. The two men reached plains full of wheat,                             \
          in a hurry to complete their journey, so quickly\
          did their pair of horses pull them onward.\
          The sun then set, and all the roads grew dark.}