{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf460
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural\qc

\f0\fs24 \cf0 BOOK FOUR\
Telemachus Visits Menelaus in Sparta\
             \
[Telemachus and Peisistratus arrive at Menelaus\'92 home in Sparta; Menelaus welcomes them, talks of Agamemnon and Odysseus; Helen questions Menelaus about the guests, drugs the wine, tells the story of Odysseus visiting Troy disguised as a beggar; Menelaus talks about the Trojan Horse; Telemachus\'92 asks Menelaus\'92 advice; Menelaus gives a long account of his travels in Egypt, especially his adventures with the Old Man of the Sea, the death of the lesser Ajax, and the death of Agamemnon; Menelaus invites Telemachus to stay, but Telemachus declines; the suitors hatch a plan to kill Telemachus; Penelope hears of their plans and is anxious; Athena sends her a phantom to reassure her; some of the suitors sail off to set an ambush for Telemachus.]\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural
\cf0              \
             When Telemachus and Peisistratus reached\
             the Spartan plain and its surrounding hills,\
             they went straight to splendid Menelaus\'92 palace.1\
             They found him inside his house, at a marriage feast\
             he was providing for his many relatives,\
             in honour of his noble son and daughter.\
             He was sending her away to Neoptolemus,\
             son of man-destroying Achilles\'97back in Troy\
             he had first promised he would offer her to him.\
     [10] He\'92d pledged his word, and now the gods were making sure           \
             the marriage would take place. He was seeing her off\
             with chariots and horses for her journey\
             to the famous city of the Myrmidons,\
             whom her husband ruled. For his son, Menelaus\
             was bringing Alector\'92s daughter home to Sparta.                                                                \
             That son, mighty Megapenthes, born to a slave,\
             was his favourite, for the gods had granted Helen\
             no more children after she had given birth\
             to the lovely girl Hermione, as beautiful\
     [20] as golden Aphrodite. So they were feasting                                      \
             in the massive palace with its high-pitched roof\'97\
             neighbours and relatives of glorious Menelaus,\
             all enjoying themselves. Among them was a singer,\
             accompanying his godlike song by playing the lyre.\
             As he began to sing, two tumblers ran and jumped\
             here and there, through the middle of the crowd.\
             \
             As the two visitors, heroic Telemachus                                                                                           \
             and Nestor\'92s noble son, stood at the palace gate\
             with their two horses, lord Eteoneus came out,\
     [30] a diligent attendant to splendid Menelaus.                                                                \
             When he noticed them, he went back inside the house,\
             to tell the shepherd of his people what he\'92d seen.\
             Standing close to Menelaus, he spoke to him\'97\
             his words had wings:\
             \
             \'93Menelaus, raised by gods,\
             there are two strangers here, two men who look\
             as if they are descended from great Zeus.\
             So tell me if we should, on their behalf,\
             take their fast horses out of harness,\
             or send them off to find some other host\
             who\'92ll welcome them as friends.\'94\
             \
     [40] These words he uttered                                 \
             really irritated fair-haired Menelaus,                                                                                                \
             so he replied as follows:\
             \
             \'93Before today,\
             Eteoneus, son of Boethous,\
             you haven\'92t been a fool. But now you talk\
             just like a silly child. For both of us\
             often feasted on the hospitality\
             of other men before we got back here,\
             hoping that Zeus would give us some relief\
             from later suffering. So unhitch those horses\
     [50] the strangers brought, and bring the men inside,                                   \
             so they may dine.\'94\
             \
             Menelaus finished. \
             Then Eteoneus left, rushing from the hall\
             and calling out to other diligent attendants\
             to follow him. They took the sweating horses\
             from the harness and hitched them in the stables,                                                             \
             scattering wheat for them, mixed with white barley grains,\
             leaned the chariot against the luminescent wall,\
             and led the men into the godlike building.\
             Telemachus and Peisistratus were amazed\
     [60] by what they noticed in the regal palace\'97                                       \
             for the high-roofed home of splendid Menelaus,\
             a man raised by Zeus, shimmered in the light,\
             as if illuminated by the sun or moon.\
             When their eyes had gazed on it with great delight,\
             they went in well-polished bathing tubs to wash.\
             After women servants had given them a bath,\
             rubbed them down with oil, and helped them put on\
             thick cloaks and tunics, they sat down on chairs                                                                  \
             right by Menelaus, son of Atreus. A serving woman\
     [70] carried in a lovely pitcher made of gold                                           \
             containing water for them to rinse their hands.\
             She poured it out into a silver basin,\
             so they could wash. Then beside them she pulled up\
             a polished table. A valued female servant\
             brought in bread and set it down before them,\
             and added many tasty delicacies as well,\
             taking freely from the food she had in store.\
             A carver lifted platters with all sorts of meat\
             and served them, then set down in front of the two men\
     [80] goblets made of gold. Fair-haired Menelaus                                     \
             welcomed both of them and said:\
             \
             \'93Help yourselves.                                      \
             Enjoy our food. And once you\'92ve had your meal,\
             we\'92ll ask you who you are. For in you two\
             your parents\'92 breeding has not been destroyed\'97\
             since you are from a royal human stock,\
             from god-nurtured kings who wield a sceptre.\
             Worthless men could not father sons like you.\'94\
             \
             Menelaus spoke. Then with his own hands he picked up\
             the roasted meat and set it down in front of them,\
     [90] the fat back cut of beef they\'92d placed in front of him,                                    \
             a mark of honour. So the two men helped themselves,\
             eating the fine meal prepared and set before them.\
             When they\'92d had their heart\'92s content of food and drink,\
             Telemachus leaned his head close to Nestor\'92s son,\
             so no one else could hear, and spoke to him:                                                                          \
             \
             \'93Son of Nestor, who brings my heart such joy,\
             look at how, throughout this echoing hall,\
             there\'92s so much sparkling bronze and gold,\
             electrum, silver, ivory\'97to me\
   [100] it\'92s the interior of Zeus\'92 home                                                   \
             on Mount Olympus, so much untold wealth\'97\
             I\'92m amazed just looking at it.\'942\
             \
             As he said this,\
             fair-haired Menelaus heard his words and spoke\
             to both of them\'97his words had wings:\
             \
             \'93Dear lads,\
             no mortal man can really rival Zeus,\
             since his possessions and his palaces \
             endure forever. But among human beings,\
             someone else might challenge me or not                                                                        \
             about our wealth. I carried riches back\
   [110] inside my ships, after we\'92d endured so much                            \
             while we were wandering. We made it home\'97\
             it took us more than seven years. We roamed\
             to Cyprus, Egypt, and Phoenicia.\
             We even reached the Ethiopians,\
             Sidonians, and Erembi\'97Lydia, too,\
             where lambs are born with horns and ewes give birth\
             three times in one full year. No master there,\
             nor any shepherd, ever lacks sweet milk\
             or cheese or meat, and through the entire year\
   [120] their flocks are ready to produce their milk.                                                \
             While I was wandering around these lands,                                                                  \
             gathering all sorts of goods, another man\
             slaughtered my own brother unexpectedly,\
             in secret, thanks to the duplicity\
             of his murderous wife. So you can understand\
             there is no joy for me in being king\
             of these possessions. You may have heard this\
             from your fathers, whoever they may be.\
             I suffered many troubles and allowed\
   [130] a really well-established home, endowed                                  \
             with many noble riches, to collapse.\
             I wish I could live with one third my wealth\
             here in my home, if those men could be safe,\
             the ones who died in the wide land of Troy,\
             far from horse-breeding Argos. And yet,\
             although I often sit here in my house                                                                                  \
             feeling sorry and in mourning for them all,\
             sometimes groaning to relieve my spirit\
             and sometimes calling for a end to moaning,\
   [140] for one can quickly get too much of sorrow,                                                \
             still, for all my grieving, I do not lament\
             all those men as much as I do one man,\
             who, when I think of him, makes me despise\
             both sleep and food, for of all Achaeans\
             no one toiled as hard as did Odysseus,\
             who took so much upon himself. For him,\
             it seems, there would be no end of trouble,\
             and I cannot forget to grieve for him.\
             He\'92s been away so long. And we don\'92t know\
   [150] if he\'92s alive or dead. Old man Laertes,                                                               \
             I would think, is in mourning for him,                                                                               \
             and so is sensible Penelope,\
             and Telemachus, as well, whom he left\
             a new-born child at home.\'94\
             \
             Menelaus spoke.\
             His words stirred up a desire in Telemachus\
             to lament his father. So from his eyelids\
             he shed a tear onto the ground, as he heard\
             what Menelaus said about Odysseus.\
             With both his hands he pulled up the purple cloak\
   [160] to hide his eyes. Noticing this, Menelaus                                          \
             debated in his mind and heart: Should he allow\
             Telemachus to speak about his father,\
             or should he first question him and sound him out\
             on each and every detail? As he thought of this                                                                     \
             in his mind and heart, Helen came into the room,\
             emerging from her fragrant high-roofed chamber.\
             She looked like golden-arrowed goddess Artemis.\
             Adreste came in, too. She set in place for her\
             a finely crafted chair. Alcippe carried in\
   [170] a soft wool rug. Phylo brought a silver basket,                                                        \
             which Helen had been given by Alcandre,\
             wife to Polybus, who lived in Thebes in Egypt,\
             where the most massive hoards of rich possessions\
             lie in people\'92s homes. He\'92d given Menelaus\
             a pair of tripods and two silver bathing tubs,\
             as well as ten gold talents. In addition,                                                                                          \
             his wife presented Helen with some lovely gifts\'97\
             a golden spinning staff and silver basket,\
             with wheels below and rims of plated gold.\
   [180] The servant woman Phylo brought this basket in                             \
             and placed it by her side, filled with fine-spun yarn.\
             On it lay the spinning rod full of purple wool.\
             Helen sat down on the chair, a stool beneath her feet.\
             At once she started speaking to her husband,\
             asking detailed questions.\
             \
             \'93Do we know,\
             my divinely cherished Menelaus,\
             who these men who\'92ve come into our home\
             claim to be? Shall I speak up and pretend,\
             or shall I tell the truth? My heart tells me                                                                       \
   [190] I must be frank. I can\'92t say I\'92ve ever seen                                 \
             someone who looks so much like someone else,\
             whether man or woman. When I see it,\
             I\'92m amazed\'97this man looks just like the son\
             of brave Odysseus\'97I mean Telemachus,\
             whom he left at home a new-born child,\
             when, because I\'92d acted so disgracefully,\
             you Achaeans all marched off to Troy,\
             your hearts intent on brutal warfare.\'94\
             \
             Fair-haired Menelaus then said in reply:\
             \
   [200] \'93This likeness you\'92ve just noticed, my dear wife,                                 \
             I\'92ve observed, as well. His feet are similar,\
             as are his hands, the glances from his eyes,                                                                   \
             his head, and his hair on top. And just now,\
             as I was remembering Odysseus,\
             discussing all the troubles he\'92d endured\
             because of me, he let a bitter tear\
             fall from his eyes and raised the purple cloak\
             across his eyelids.\'94\
             \
             Then Peisistratus, Nestor\'92s son,\
             spoke out and said:\
             \
             \'93Menelaus, son of Atreus,\
   [210] Zeus-fostered leader of your people,                                                                    \
             this man here is indeed, as you have said,\
             Odysseus\'92 son. But he\'92s a prudent man\'97\
             in his heart he\'92s too ashamed to come\
             on his first visit here and put on a show\
             with some assertive speech in front of you,\
             whose voice we listen to with great delight,                                                                  \
             as if it were a god\'92s. I\'92ve been sent here\
             by Geranian horseman Nestor as his guide.\
             He wants to see you and get your advice,                                 \
   [220] in word or deed. For with his father gone,                                                     \
             a child has many troubles in his home,\
             and there is no one there to help him.\
             That is what\'92s happened with Telemachus.\
             His father\'92s vanished, and there\'92s no one else\
             to protect his house from ruin.\'94\
             \
             Fair-haired Menelaus\
             then answered Peisistratus, saying:\
             \
             \'93Well now,\
             this is strange indeed\'97to my home has come\
             the offspring of a man I cherish, someone\
             who, on my behalf, endured much hardship.                                                              \
   [230] If he\'92d returned, I thought I\'92d welcome him                              \
             above all other Argives, should far-seeing Zeus\
             on Mount Olympus let the two of us\
             make it home by sea in our swift ships.\
             I would have given him an Argive city\
             and built a home for him, where he could live,\
             bringing him from Ithaca with all his wealth,\
             his son, and his own people. I\'92d have emptied\
             some neighbouring city in the region,\
             whose people all acknowledge me as king.\
   [240] Then we could live here and be together,                                                       \
             and nothing would have separated us.\
             We could have often entertained each other,\
             getting joy from one another\'92s company,\
             until Death\'92s black cloud came to embrace us.                                                          \
             But god himself must have been envious,\
             to make that unlucky man the only one\
             who didn\'92t get back home.\'94\
             \
             Menelaus finished. \
             What he\'92d just said made them all feel like weeping.\
             Argive Helen, daughter of Zeus, began to cry,\
   [250] as did Telemachus and Menelaus, too,                                                                           \
             son of Atreus. Nestor\'92s son could not keep the tears\
             out of his eyes. In his heart he was remembering\
             valiant Antilochus, killed by Dawn\'92s courageous son.3\
             With him in mind, Peisistratus spoke\'97his words had wings:\
             \
             \'93Son of Atreus, old warrior Nestor                                                                                     \
             used to say, when we conversed together\
             and your name was mentioned in our home,\
             that, as far as sound thinking was concerned,\
             you were preeminent among all men.\
   [260] So, if it seems somehow appropriate,                                                                  \
             you should listen to me now. I don\'92t enjoy\
             weeping at dinner time, and early Dawn\
             will soon be here. I don\'92t think it shameful\
             to cry for any mortal man who\'92s died\
             and met his fate. In fact, this ritual\
             is the only ceremony we give\
             for these unhappy men\'97we cut our hair\
             and let the tears run down our cheeks. I have\
             a brother who was killed, not the worst man\
   [270] among the Argives. Perhaps you knew him.                                                 \
             I never met him, never even saw him,                                                                               \
             but they say Antilochus surpassed all men\
             in running fast and fighting well.\'94\
             \
             Fair-haired Menelaus\
             then answered Peisistratus, saying:\
             \
             \'93My friend,\
             you have truly mentioned everything\
             a right-thinking man might say or do,\
             even someone older than yourself.\
             The kind of father you were born from\
             enables you to speak so sensibly.\
   [280] To recognize someone\'92s inheritance                                         \
             is easy, when the son of Cronos spins\
             good fortune\'92s threads at marriage and at birth,\
             the way he now has done for Nestor,\
             granting him for all his days continually\
             to reach a ripe old age in his own home,                                                                         \
             with sons who are, in turn, intelligent\
             and great spear fighters, too. But we must stop\
             and let that earlier weeping cease. Let\'92s have\
             water poured upon our hands, then once again\
   [290] turn our minds to dinner. In the morning                                \
             there\'92ll be stories for Telemachus and me\
             to tell each other to our heart\'92s content.\'94\
             \
             He finished speaking. Then one of his attendants,\
             diligent Asphalion, poured water on their hands,\
             and they reached for the rich food spread out before them.\
             \
             Then Helen, Zeus\'92 daughter, thought of something else.\
             She quickly dropped into the wine they were enjoying                                                  \
             a drug which eased men\'92s pains and irritations,\
             making them forget their troubles. A drink of this,\
   [300] once mixed in with wine, would guarantee no man                         \
             would let a tear fall on his cheek for one whole day,\
             not even if his mother and his father died,\
             or if, in his own presence, men armed with swords\
             hacked down his brother or his son, as he looked on.\
             Zeus\'92 daughter had effective healing potions,\
             like that drug, which she\'92d obtained from Polydamna,\
             wife of Thon, who came from Egypt, where the fields,\
             so rich in grain, produce the greatest crop of drugs,\
             many of which, once mixed, are beneficial,\
   [310] and many poisonous.4 Every person there                                                  \
             is a physician whose knowledge of these things\
             surpasses that of every other human group,\
             for through their ancestry they stem from Paeeon.5\
             When Helen had stirred in the drug and told them\
             to serve the wine, she rejoined the conversation\
             and spoke up once again:\
             \
             \'93Menelaus, son of Atreus,\
             whom gods cherish, and you sons of noble men\'97\
             since both good and bad are given by Zeus,\
             sometimes to one man and, at other times,    \
   [320] to someone else, for he is capable                                             \
             of all things, you should now sit in the hall\
             and dine. After that, enjoy your stories.\
             I\'92ll tell you one I think is suitable.\
             I will not speak of, nor could I recite,                                                                                  \
             everything about steadfast Odysseus,\
             all hardships he went through. But there\'92s that time\
             when you Achaeans were in such distress\
             and that strong man endured and did so much\'97\
             right in homeland of those Trojans, too!\
   [330] With savage blows he battered his own body,                                             \
             threw a ragged garment on his shoulders,\
             so he looked like a slave, and then sneaked in,\
             along the broad streets of that hostile city.\
             He hid his own identity, pretending\
             he was someone else, a beggar\'97something\
             he\'92d never been among Achaean ships\'97\
             and then went in the Trojans\'92 city. None of them\
             suspected anything. I was the only one                                                                             \
             who recognized him, in spite of his disguise.\
   [340] I questioned him, but his skill in deception                              \
             made him evasive. Still, when I had bathed him,\
             rubbed him with oil, and was helping him get dressed\'97\
             once I\'92d sworn a mighty oath not to reveal\
             among the Trojans that he was Odysseus\
             until he\'92d reached the swift ships and the huts\'97\
             he told me all about Achaean plans.\
             Then his long sword slaughtered many Trojans,\
             and he returned, bringing the Achaeans,\
             lots of information. Other Trojan women\
   [350] began to cry aloud, but I was glad.                                                                         \
             My heart by then had changed\'97it now desired                                                        \
             to go back. I was sorry for that blindness\
             Aphrodite brought, when she\'92d led me there,\
             far from my own land, abandoning my child,\
             my bridal room, and my own husband, too,\
             who lacked nothing in good looks or wisdom.\'94\
             \
             In reply to Helen, fair-haired Menelaus said:\
             \
             \'93Yes, indeed, dear wife, everything you\'92ve said\
             is true. Before now, I\'92ve come to understand\
   [360] the minds and plans of many warriors.                                                             \
             I\'92ve roamed through many lands. But my eyes\
             have never seen a man to match Odysseus.\
             How I loved his steadfast heart! What about                                                                \
             the things that forceful man endured and did\
             in the wooden horse? Achaea\'92s finest men\'97\
             all of us\'97were sitting in it, carrying\
             a lethal fate to Trojans. Then you came there,\
             perhaps instructed by some god who wished\
             to give great glory to the Trojans.\
   [370] And, where you walked, noble De\'efphobus                                \
             followed, too.6 Three times you circled round,\
             feeling that hollow trap. Your voice called out,\
             naming the best warriors among Danaans,\
             and you made it sound just like the voice\
             of each man\'92s Argive wife. Now, I was there,\
             sitting with lord Odysseus in the middle,                                                                         \
             and with Tydeus\'92 son. We heard you call.\
             Two of us\'97Diomedes and myself\'97\
             were eager to get up and charge outside\
   [380] or else to answer back from where we were,                                               \
             inside the horse. But Odysseus stopped us\'97\
             we were really keen, but he held us in check.\
             Then all the other sons of the Achaeans\
             kept their mouths shut, except for Anticlus,\
             the only one still keen to cry aloud\
             and answer you. Odysseus clapped his hand\
             firmly on Anticlus\'92 mouth and held him,\
             thus rescuing all Achaeans. He kept\
             his grip on Anticlus until Athena\
             led you away.\'94\
             \
   [390] Then prudent Telemachus replied:                                              \
             \
             \'93Menelaus, son of Atreus, cherished by Zeus,\
             leader of your people, that incident\
             is more painful still\'97it could not save him\
             from a bitter death, not even if the heart\
             inside him had been made of iron.\
             But come, send us to bed, so sweet Sleep\
             can bring us joy, once we lie down to rest.\'94\
             \
             Once Telemachus spoke, Helen told her slaves\
             to set up mattresses within the corridor\
   [400] and spread out lovely purple blankets over them,                                              \
             with rugs on top, and over these some woollen cloaks.\
             The women left the hall with torches in their hands                                                         \
             and arranged the beds. A herald led the guests away.\
             And so they slept there in the palace vestibule,\
             prince Telemachus and Nestor\'92s noble son.\
             The son of Atreus slept in an inner room,\
             inside the high-roofed home, with long-robed Helen,\
             goddess among women, lying there beside him.\
             \
             As soon as rose-fingered early Dawn appeared,\
   [410] Menelaus, skilled at war shouts, got out of bed                                \
             and put his clothes on, slinging a sharp sword\
             around his shoulders. He laced up lovely sandals\
             over his sleek feet. Then, looking like some god,                                                                \
             he left his room. He sat beside Telemachus\
             and then addressed him, saying:\
             \
             \'93Prince Telemachus,\
             what do you need that\'92s brought you all this way\
             on the sea\'92s broad back to lovely Sparta?\
             Is it a public or a private matter?\
             Tell me about it, and be frank.\'94\
             \
             Shrewd Telemachus\
             then said in reply:\
             \
   [420] \'93Menelaus, son of Atreus,                                   \
             cherished by Zeus and leader of your people,\
             I\'92ve come to see if you could give me news\
             about my father. My home\'92s being eaten up,\
             my rich estates destroyed. My house is full\
             of enemies who keep on butchering\
             flocks of sheep and shambling bent-horned cattle.                                               \
             They are suitors for my mother\'97their pride\
             makes them supremely arrogant. That\'92s why\
             I\'92ve now come to your knee, to see if you\
   [430] perhaps can tell me of his mournful death\'97                            \
             in case your own eyes witnessed it somewhere,\
             or else you\'92ve found out from some other man\
             the story of his wandering. For his mother\
             delivered him into a life of sorrow,\
             more so than other men. And do not speak\
             from pity, or give me words of consolation,\
             but tell me truly how you chanced to see him.\
             I\'92m begging you, if ever in word or deed\
             my father, brave Odysseus, over there,\
   [440] on Trojan soil, where you Achaean men                                           \
             endured so much, made you a promise\
             and then kept his word, speak to me now,\
             and give me the truth.\'94\
             \
             Fair-haired Menelaus,\
             very annoyed by what he\'92d heard, replied:\
             \
             \'93It\'92s disgraceful\
             how such wretched cowards want to lie\
             in that brave warrior\'92s bed, as if a deer\
             had lulled her new-born suckling fawns to sleep\
             in a mighty lion\'92s den and then gone roaming\
             through mountain fields and grassy valleys\
   [450] in search of forage\'97then the lion comes                                  \
             back to his lair and brings to both of them\
             a shameful death. That just how Odysseus                                                                     \
             will bring those suitors their disgraceful doom.\
             O Father Zeus, Athena, and Apollo,\
             how I wish Odysseus would come back\
             and meet the suitors with the strength he had\
             when he stood up in well-built Lesbos once\
             in a wrestling match with Philomeleides.\
             Using his great power, he threw him down,\
   [460] and all Achaean men rejoiced. Those suitors                            \
             would quickly find their bitter courtship\
             ends in a swift death. But these things you ask,\
             what you\'92ve begged me about, I\'92ll not digress\
             to speak of other things, nor will I lie.\
             No. What the Old Man of the Sea told me\'97\
             and did so truthfully\'97I\'92ll not hide from you.\
             I won\'92t conceal a single word. \
             \
             \'93In Egypt,                                                        \
             though I was eager to get home, the gods\
             prevented me\'97I had not offered them\
   [470] a full and proper sacrifice, and gods                                         \
             always demand obedience to their orders.\
             Now, just in front of Egypt there\'92s an island,\
             right in the crashing sea\'97it\'92s called Pharos\'97\
             as far off shore as a hollow ship can sail\
             in one whole day, when a fine stiff breeze\
             blows up behind her. There\'92s a harbour there\
             with excellent moorage, and from that spot\
             men launch well-balanced ships into the sea,\
             once they have taken on supplies of water.\
   [480] For twenty days the gods detained me there.                                                      \
             Not once was there a favourable wind,\
             the sort of offshore breeze which makes men\'92s ships\
             race out across the broad back of the sea.\
             Then my provisions would have all been spent,\
             together with the spirit in my crew,\
             if a goddess had not felt pity for me\
             and rescued us\'97the goddess Eidothea,\
             daughter of the Old Man of the Sea,\
             great Proteus. For I had moved her heart,\
   [490] more so than other men. When she met me,                                              \
             I was by myself, for I\'92d wandered off,\
             away from my companions, who\'92d gone out,\
             as they always did, to scour the island,\
             fishing with bent hooks, their stomachs cramped\
             from hunger. She came up close to me and said:                                                    \
             \
             \'91Stranger, are you a slow-witted idiot,\
             or are you happy just to let things go\
             and find delight in your own suffering?\
             You\'92ve been stranded so long on this island,\
   [500] unable to discover any sign of help,                                                         \
             while your companions\'92 spirits waste away.\'92\
             \
             \'93That\'92s what she said. So then I answered her:\
             \
             \'91Whoever you may be among the gods,\
             I\'92ll tell you I have not been pent up here\
             with my consent. Something must have happened\
             to make me act against immortal gods,\
             who occupy wide heaven. But tell me this\'97\
             for gods know all things\'97which immortal one\
             keeps my feet shackled here and blocks my way?                                     \
   [510] Tell me how I find my way back home,                                               \
             how I sail across the fish-filled seas.\'92\
             \
             \'93I finished speaking. The lovely goddess\
             immediately gave me her answer:\
             \
             \'91All right, stranger, I\'92ll be truthful with you.\
             The Old Man of the Sea comes here from Egypt,\
             I mean infallible, eternal Proteus,\
             a god who knows the depths of every sea,\
             Poseidon\'92s servant and, so people say,\
             my father, too, the one who sired me.\
   [520] Now, if somehow you could set an ambush                      \
             and catch hold of him, he\'92d show you your way.\
             He\'92d chart the course for your return and map\
             how you could sail across the fish-filled seas.                                                 \
             And, Zeus-fostered man, if you were willing,\
             he\'92d tell you all the good and evil things\
             which have been taking place in your own house\
             while you\'92ve been travelling away from home\
             on such a long and arduous journey.\'92\
             \
             \'93When she\'92d told me this, I replied and said:\
             \
   [530] \'91Could you yourself produce a strategy                             \
             to ambush this divine old man, in case\
             he sees me first and, knowing all my plans,\
             escapes me. It\'92s difficult for mortal men\
             to overcome a god.\'92\
             \
             \'93Once I\'92d said this,\
             the lovely goddess answered right away:\
             \
             \'91Stranger, I\'92ll be frank\'97tell you the truth\
             in everything. When the sun has made its way                                             \
             up into the middle of the heavens,\
             that infallible Old Man of the Sea\
   [540] emerges from the brine, where he\'92s concealed                 \
             by dark waves stirred up by the West Wind\'92s breath.\
             Once he gets here, he lies down to rest\
             in these hollow caves, and around him sleeps\
             a herd of seals\'97they are the offspring\
             of the lovely daughter of the sea and swim up\
             out of the grey water. Their breath gives off\
             the sharp salt smell of the deep sea. At daybreak,\
             I\'92ll take you there and organize an ambush.\
             You must carefully select three comrades,\
   [550] the best men in those well-decked ships of yours.                     \
             Now I\'92ll describe for you all the sly tricks                                                           \
             that old man has. First, he\'92ll inspect the seals.\
             He\'92ll count them, numbering them off by fives.\
             Once he\'92s looked them over, he\'92ll lie down\
             in their midst, like a shepherd with his sheep.\
             As soon as you see him stretched out to sleep,\
             then you must use all your strength and courage\
             to hold him there for all his desperate moves,\
             as he struggles to escape. For he\'92ll attempt\
   [560] to change himself into all sorts of shapes                          \
             of everything that crawls over the earth,\
             or into water or a sacred flame.\
             You must not flinch\'97keep up your grip on him\'97\
             make it even tighter. And finally,\
             when he begins to speak and questions you                                                    \
             in the same shape you saw him go to sleep,\
             then, warrior king, you can relax your grip\
             and let the old man go. Ask him which god\
             is angry at you and how you\'92ll get back,\
   [570] charting a course across the fish-filled seas.\'92                                    \
             \
             \'93Saying this, she plunged into the crashing sea.\
             I went to where my ships were on the beach\'97\
             my dark heart thinking, as I walked, of many things.\
             Once I\'92d reached the ships along the shore,\
             we prepared and ate our evening meal.\
             When immortal night arrived, we lay down                                                               \
             beside the breaking surf. Then, as the streaks\
             of rose-fingered early Dawn appeared,\
             I walked along the shores of that wide sea\
   [580] praying in earnest to the gods. Then I took                             \
             three comrades, the ones I trusted most\
             in any enterprise. That sea goddess,\
             who\'92d plunged into the bosom of the sea,\
             brought up four seal skins from the ocean depths,\
             each one freshly skinned, then set up the plot\
             against her father. She scooped out in the sand                            \
             some pits to hide in, and then waited there.     \
             Once we\'92d come up really close beside her,\
             she made us lie down in a row and threw                                                                     \
   [590] a seal skin over each of us. That ambush                                 \
             would have been too horrible to bear,\
             for the atrocious stench of sea-born seals\
             was dreadful. Who would let himself lie down\
             with creatures from the sea? But Eidothea\
             personally helped us out by thinking up\
             a useful remedy\'97she got ambrosia,\
             sweet-smelling oil of the immortal gods,\
             and put it under each man\'92s nose. That killed\
             the foul stink coming from those animals.\
   [600] With patient hearts we waited there all morning.                                 \
             Crowds of seals emerged and then lay down\
             in rows along the seashore. At noon,\
             the old man came up out of the water,                                                                            \
             discovered the plump seals, looked at each one,\
             and made his count, beginning first with us,                                           \
             whom he included with the animals.\
             His heart did not suspect there was a trick.     \
             Then he lay down. We charged up with a shout\
             and grabbed him in our arms. But the old man\
   [610] did not forget his skilful tricks. At first,                                                           \
             he turned himself into a hairy lion,\
             and then into a serpent and a leopard, \
             then a huge wild boar. He changed himself\
             to flowing water and a towering tree.\
             We didn\'92t flinch but kept our grip on him.\
             Our hearts were resolute. When the old man,                                                         \
             for all his devious skills, got tired out,\
             he spoke up, asking me some questions:\
             \
             \'91Son of Atreus, which god helped your plan\
   [620] and forged a scheme so you could lie in wait                    \
             and ambush me against my will? And why?\
             What do you need?\'92\
             \
             \'93When he\'92d said this to me,\
             I answered him and said: \
             \
             \'91You know that, old man,\
             so why mislead me with such questioning?\
             I\'92ve been stranded too long on this island\
             and can\'92t discover any sign of help.\
             The heart is growing faint inside me.\
             So tell me, for you gods know everything,\
             which one of the immortals chains my feet\
   [630] and blocks my way. And speak to me as well               \
             about my journey back, how I may sail                                                        \
             across the fish-filled seas.\'92\
             \
             \'93When I\'92d said that,\
             he answered me at once: \
             \
             \'91Before you left,\
             you should have offered a fine sacrifice\
             to Zeus and other gods, so you could sail\
             across the wine-dark sea and then arrive\
             in your own land as fast as possible.\
             Your fate decrees you will not see your friends\
             or reach your homeland or your well-built house,\
   [640] until you\'92ve gone back once more to Egypt,                              \
             to the waters of that Zeus-fed river,\
             and made holy sacrifices to the gods,\
             the immortal ones who hold wide heaven.\
             The gods will then give you that journey home                                      \
             which you so yearn for.\'92\
             \
             \'93As the old man spoke,\
             my fond heart broke apart inside me,\
             because he\'92d told me I must go once more\
             across the misty seas, on that long trip\
             to Egypt, a painful journey. But still,\
             I answered him and spoke these words: \
             \
   [650] \'91Old man,                                       \
             I will carry out what you have told me.\
             But come now, tell me\'97and speak truthfully\'97\
             did Achaeans in those ships get safely back,\
             all those men Nestor and myself left there\
             when we set out from Troy? Did any die\
             a bitter death on board, or in the arms\
             of those who loved them, after they\'92d tied up                                          \
             the loose threads of the war?\'92\
             \
             \'93That\'92s what I asked,\
             and he gave me his answer right away:\
             \
   [660] \'91Son of Atreus, why question me on this?                                     \
             You don\'92t need to know or to read my mind.\
             For once you\'92ve learned the details of all this,\
             you\'92ll not hold back your tears for very long.\
             Many of those warriors were destroyed,\
             and many men survived. Among Achaeans,\
             armed in bronze, only two leading warriors\
             were killed on their way home. As for the fights,\
             you were there yourself. There is one leader\
             held back by the sea somewhere, but still alive.\
   [670] Ajax perished among his long-oared ships\'97                 \
             at Gyrae Poseidon first propelled his boat                                                   \
             against huge rocks, then saved him from the sea.7\
             Though Athena hated him, he\'92d have been saved,\
             if he\'92d not grown insanely foolish\'97\
             he stated he had managed to escape\
             the sea\'92s huge depths, in spite of all the gods.\
             Poseidon heard him make this boastful claim.\
             Immediately those mighty hands of his\
             picked up his trident and then brought it down\
   [680] on that rock at Gyrae, splitting it apart.                                         \
             One piece stayed in place\'97the other one\
             sheared off and fell into the sea, the part\
             where Ajax sat when his mind first became\
             so utterly deluded. He fell down\
             into the endless surging waves and died                                                        \
             by swallowing salt water. But your brother\
             escaped that fate\'97he and his hollow ships\
             survived, for queen Hera rescued him.\
             And then, when he was just about to reach\
   [690] the steep height at Malea, storm winds caught him.          \
             As he groaned in distress, they carried him\
             across the fish-filled seas to the remotest part\
             of where Thyestes used to live, now the home\
             of Thyestes\'92 son Aegisthus.8 But then,\
             once the gods had changed the wind\'92s direction,                                  \
             it seemed that he could make it safely back.\
             So he got home. And he was full of joy\
             to set foot on his native land once more.\
             He embraced the earth and kissed it\'97shedding\
   [700] numerous warm tears\'97he was so delighted                  \
             at the sight. But a watchman spied him out,\
             someone Aegisthus had placed as lookout,\
             to promote his plot, promising the man,\
             as his reward, two gold talents. He\'92d been there,\
             on watch, for one whole year, just in case\
             Agamemnon should succeed in getting back\
             without being noticed and remind them all\
             of his ferocious power. The watchman went\
             straight to the palace to report the news\
   [710] to the shepherd of the people. So then,                                          \
             Aegisthus came up with a treacherous plan.\
             He picked out twenty men, the best there were                                    \
             in the whole state, and set up an ambush.\
             Then, in another section of the house,\
             he had a feast made ready and went off\
             with chariot and horses to escort back\
             Agamemnon, shepherd of his people,\
             all the while intending to destroy him.\
             Aegisthus then accompanied him home\'97\
   [720] he suspected nothing of the murder\'97                           \
             and then, after the feast, he butchered him,\
             just as one might slay an ox in its own stall.\
             Of those companions of the son of Atreus\
             who followed him, not one was left alive.\
             Nor were any of Aegisthus\'92 comrades\'97\
             they were all slaughtered in the palace.\'92\
             \
             \'93The old man finished speaking. My fond heart\
             was shattered, and, as I sat in the sand,\
             I wept\'97my spirit had no wish to live                                                     \
   [730] or gaze upon the light of day. But then,                                                        \
             when I\'92d had my fill of rolling in the sand\
             and weeping, the Old Man of the Sea\
             spoke frankly to me, saying, \
             \
             \'91Son of Atreus,\
             you must not spend so much time like this,\
             in constant weeping. That\'92s no help to us.\
             You must strive, as quickly as you can,\
             to get back to your native land. It may be\
             you\'92ll find Aegisthus is still living there,\
             or else Orestes has preceded you\
   [740] and killed the man. If so, then there\'92s a chance            \
             you\'92ll get back for Aegisthus\'92 funeral feast.\'92\
             \
             \'93The old man finished speaking. In my chest\
             my heart and spirit, for all my grieving,\
             felt strong once again. So I answered him\'97                                                            \
             my words had wings: \
             \
             \'91Now I understand\
             what\'92s happened to these men. But tell me\
             about the third one\'97whether he still lives,\
             held back by the wide sea, or has been killed.\
             I wish to hear that, for all my sorrow.\'92\
             \
   [750] \'93I spoke, and he at once replied, saying,                                                      \
             \
             \'91You mean Laertes\'92 son, from Ithaca.\
             I saw him on an island. He was weeping\
             in the palace of the nymph Calypso,\
             who keeps him there by force. He has no way\
             of getting back to his own land\'97he lacks\
             companions and ships equipped with oars,\
             to carry him across the sea\'92s broad back.                                                      \
             As for you, Zeus-fostered Menelaus,\
             it\'92s not ordained that you will meet your fate\
   [760] and die in horse-rich Argos. No. The gods                     \
             will send you off to the Elysian fields,\
             and to the outer limits of the earth\'97\
             the place where fair-haired Rhadamanthus lives\
             and life for human beings is really easy\'97\
             there\'92s no snow or heavy storms or even rain,\
             and Oceanus sends a steady breeze,\
             as West Wind blows to keep men cool and fresh.\
             Helen is your wife\'97that\'92s why they\'92ll do this,\
             because they see you as the man who married\
             Zeus daughter.\'929\
             \
   [770] \'93With these words,                                                  \
             the old man plunged back in the surging sea.\
             I went to my ships and godlike ship mates.\
             As I walked, my heart was darkly troubled,\
             but once I\'92d reached my ships beside the sea\
             and we\'92d prepared a meal, immortal night\
             came down, and we slept there on the shore.\'94  \
             \
             \'93As soon as rose-fingered early Dawn appeared,\
             we dragged our boats into the sacred sea,\
             then fitted masts and sails on our trim ships.          \
   [780] The men climbed in, went to their rowing seats,                                     \
             and, sitting well in order, raised their oars                                                                     \
             and struck the grey salt sea. So I sailed back\
             to Egypt\'92s heaven-fed river once again,\
             and there I offered a full sacrifice.\
             Once I\'92d appeased the anger of those gods\
             who live forever, I made a funeral mound\
             for Agamemnon, to make sure his fame\
             would never die, and when I\'92d finished that,\
             I set off on my journey home. The gods \
   [790] gave me fair winds and brought me with all speed                   \
             back to the native land I love.  \
             \
             \'93But come now,\
             you must stay with me in my palace here\
             ten or eleven days, and after that\
             I\'92ll send you off with honour. I\'92ll give you\
             lovely gifts\'97a finely polished chariot\
             and three horses, too, and, as well as these,                                                                 \
             a gorgeous cup, so you can pour libations\
             to eternal gods and remember me\
             for all your days to come.\'94\
             \
             Shrewd Telemachus      \
             then said to Menelaus in reply:\
             \
   [800] \'93Son of Atreus,                                                  \
             you must not hold me up for very long. \
             To tell the truth, I\'92d like to stay right here,\
             sitting in your palace an entire year,\
             and I\'92d not miss my parents or my home,\
             for I get such astonishing delight\
             from what you say and from your stories.\
             But my companions are already restless\
             back in sacred Pylos, and time has passed\
             while you\'92ve detained me here. As for gifts,             \
   [810] give me whatever you wish, just let it be                                            \
             something you treasure. But I\'92ll not take\
             those horses back with me to Ithaca\'97\
             I\'92ll leave them here to bring you pleasure.\
             For you are king of an extensive plain\
             in which huge quantities of lotus grow,\
             with sedge, broad-eared white barley, wheat, and rye.\
             But there are no wide plains in Ithaca,\
             no meadows. It has grazing land for goats,\
             something I prefer to lush horse pasture.\
   [820] No island sloping down into the sea                                         \
             has meadows fit for raising horses,\
             and that\'92s especially true of Ithaca.\'94\
             \
             Then the great war-shouter Menelaus smiled,\
             patted Telemachus with his hand, and said:                                                                              \
             \
             \'93My lad, the way you\'92ve spoken out proclaims\
             your noble blood. So I\'92ll exchange those gifts.\
             That I can do. Of all the things stored up\
             here in my home, I\'92ll give you the finest,\
             the most expensive one. I\'92ll offer you\
   [830] a beautifully crafted mixing bowl.                                                                           \
             It\'92s all silver, with rims of hammered gold.\
             Hephaestus made it. Warrior Phaedimus,\
             the Sidonians\'92 king, presented it to me\
             when I went there and his home sheltered me.\
             Now I\'92d like to give that mixing bowl to you.\'94\
             \
             So these men kept conversing with each other.                                                \
             \
             Meanwhile, back in Telemachus\'92 Ithaca,\
             the banqueters had reached the royal palace,\
             driving sheep there and carrying strong wine.\
   [840] Their well-dressed wives were sending bread for them.                                \
             As these men were in the hall preparing dinner,\
             the suitors were outside Odysseus\'92 palace,\
             enjoying themselves by throwing spears and discus\
             on level ground in front\'97with all the arrogance\
             they usually displayed. Their two leaders,\
             Antinous and handsome Eurymachus,\
             were sitting there\'97by far the best of all the suitors.                                                         \
             Then Noemon, Phronius\'92 son, came up\
             to question Antinous. He said:\
             \
             \'93Antinous,\
   [850] in our hearts do we truly know or not                                      \
             when Telemachus will be coming back\
             from sandy Pylos? He went away\
             taking a ship of mine which I now need\
             to make the trip across to spacious Elis,\
             where I have twelve mares and sturdy mules\
             still sucking on the teat, not yet broken.\
             I want to fetch and break in one of them.\'94\
             \
             He finished. In their hearts the suitors were amazed.\
             They had no idea Telemachus had gone\
   [860] to Pylos, land of Neleus, and still believed                                       \
             he was somewhere with the flocks on his estates\
             or with the swineherd. So in answer to Noemon,                                                                \
             Antinous, Eupeithes\'92 son, spoke up:\
             \
             \'93Tell me the truth\'97\
             when did he leave? What young men went with him?\
             Did he take citizens of Ithaca,\
             or were those men his slaves and servants?\
             That\'92s something he could do. And tell me this\'97\
             I want the truth, so I know what happened\'97\
             did he take that black ship against your will,\
   [870] by force, or did you volunteer to give it,                                                          \
             because he begged you to?\'94\
             \
             Noemon, son of Phronius,\
             then answered Antinous:\
             \
             \'93I agreed to give it to him.\
             Would anyone have acted otherwise,\
             when a man like him, with a grief-stricken heart,                                                  \
             makes a request? It would be difficult\
             to deny him what he asked. The young men\'97\
             the ones who went with him\'97are excellent,\
             except for us, the best this land affords.\
             As they embarked, I observed their leader,\
   [880] Mentor, or some god who looks just like him.                                           \
             I\'92m surprised at that\'97at dawn yesterday\
             I saw lord Mentor, though by that time\
             he\'92d already gone on board for Pylos.\'94\
             \
             Once he finished speaking, Noemon went away,\
             back to his father\'92s house. But those two suitors,\
             Antinous and Eurymachus, had angry hearts.\
             They quickly got the suitors to give up their games\
             and had them sit down all together in a group.\
             Antinous, Eupeithes\'92 son, then spoke to them.                                                                       \
   [890] He was annoyed, his black heart filled with rage,                                                \
             his flashing eyes a fiery blaze:\
             \
             \'93Here\'92s trouble.\
             In his overbearing way Telemachus,\
             with this voyage of his, has now achieved\
             significant success. And we believed\
             he\'92d never see it through. Against our will,\
             this mere youngster has simply gone away,\
             launching a ship and choosing our best men,\
             the finest in the land. He\'92ll soon begin\
             creating problems for us. I hope Zeus\
   [900] will sap his strength before he comes of age                             \
             and reaches full maturity. Come now,\
             give me a swift ship and twenty comrades,\
             so I can watch for him and set an ambush,                                                                    \
             as he navigates his passage through the strait\
             dividing Ithaca from rugged Samos,\
             and bring this trip searching for his father\
             to a dismal end.\'94\
             \
             When Antinous had finished,\
             all of them agreed, and they instructed him\
             to carry out what he\'92d proposed. Then they got up\
   [910] and went back inside the palace of Odysseus.                                                         \
             \
             Now, Penelope was not ignorant for long\
             of what those suitors were scheming in their hearts.\
             For the herald Medon told her. He\'92d been listening\
             outside the hall, as they were making plans inside,\
             weaving their plot. He proceeded through the house\
             to tell Penelope the news. As he came out\
             just across the threshold, Penelope called him:                                                                      \
             \
             \'93Herald, why have these noble suitors\
             sent you out here? Are you supposed to tell\
   [920] the female household slaves of lord Odysseus                          \
             to stop their work and then make them a feast?\
             After this whole courtship, I hope they never\
             get together somewhere else. And today,\
             may they make the banquet in this house\
             their latest and their last, all those of you\
             who by gathering here consume so much,\
             the wealth of wise Telemachus. It seems,\
             when you were children all that time ago,\
             you didn\'92t pay attention to your fathers,\
   [930] as they talked about the kind of man                                        \
             Odysseus was among their generation\'97\
             in Ithaca he never did or said                                                                                                      \
             a hurtful thing to anyone, unlike\
             the usual habits of our godlike kings,\
             who hate one man and love another one.\
             He never did the slightest injury\
             to any man. But your heart and wicked acts\
             are plain to see\'97you show no gratitude\
             for kindness shown to you in earlier days.\'94\
             \
   [940] Then Medon, an intelligent man, said to her:                                                         \
             \
             \'93My queen, I wish that what you\'92ve just described\
             were the worst of it. But now these suitors\
             are planning something much more dangerous\
             and troubling\'97I hope the son of Cronos\
             never permits them to succeed. They mean\
             to kill Telemachus with their sharp swords,                                                                   \
             as he comes home. He\'92s sailed off to Pylos\
             and then to sacred Sparta, seeking news\
             about his father.\'94\
             \
             As Medon spoke, Penelope\
   [950] felt her heart and knees give way where she was standing.                       \
             For some time she couldn\'92t speak a word to him\'97\
             both her eyes were full of tears, and she lost her voice.\
             But finally she spoke to him and said:\
             \
             \'93Herald,\
             why did my son leave? There was no need\
             for him to go on board swift-moving ships,\
             men\'92s salt-water horses, to sail across\
             enormous seas. Did he do it to make sure\
             he\'92d never leave a name among all men?\'94                                                                    \
             \
             Wise Medon then answered Penelope and said: \
             \
   [960] \'93I don\'92t know if some god was urging him                               \
             or if his own heart prompted him to sail\
             for Pylos, to learn about his father\'97\
             whether he was coming home again\
             or had met his fate.\'94\
             \
             After saying this,\
             Medon went away, down through Odysseus\'92 home.\
             A cloud of heart-destroying grief fell on Penelope.\
             She lacked the strength to sit down on a chair\'97\
             and there were many in the room. She collapsed,\
             crouching on the threshold of that splendid room,\
   [970] moaning in distress. Around her, all her servants                            \
             cried out, too, all those inside the house, young and old.                                            \
             Still weeping with that group, Penelope spoke out:\
             \
             \'93Friends, listen. For Zeus has given me\
             more sorrows than any other woman\
             born and raised with me. Some time ago\
             I lost my noble husband\'97a man\
             who had a lion\'92s heart and qualities\
             which made him stand out among Danaans\
             in all sorts of ways, a courageous man, \
   [980] whose famous name is well known far and wide                      \
             throughout all Greece and middle Argos.\
             And now, without a word, storm winds sweep\
             my son, whom I so love, away from home,\
             and I don\'92t even hear about his journey.\
             You are too cruel. In your minds, not one of you\
             thought to rouse me from my bed, though you knew,                                       \
             deep in your hearts, the moment he embarked\
             in his black hollow ship. If I had known\
             he was going to undertake this journey,\
   [990] he would have stayed here. He really would,                                               \
             for all his eagerness to make the trip.\
             Or else I would have perished in these rooms\
             before he left me. But now one of you\
             must quickly summon old man Dolius,\
             my servant, whom my father gave to me\
             before I ever came to Ithaca,\
             the one who tends my orchard full of trees,\
             so he may go as quickly as he can,\
             to sit beside Laertes and tell him \
   [1000] all these things. Perhaps Laertes then                                       \
             in his mind can somehow weave a plan,\
             then go and weep his case before those men\
             intent on wiping out his family,                                                                                                \
             the race of heavenly Odysseus.\'94\
             \
             The good nurse Eurycleia answered Penelope:\
             \
             \'93Dear lady, you may kill me with a sword\
             or keep me in the house, but I\'92ll not hide\
             a word from you. For I knew all this.\
             I gave him everything he asked for,\
   [1010] bread and sweet wine, too. He made me swear                        \
             a mighty oath I would not tell you,\
             not until he\'92d been away eleven days\
             or you yourself should miss him and find out\
             he\'92d left\'97in case you harmed your lovely skin                                                        \
             with weeping. But you should have a bath,\
             put clean clothing on your body, then go\'97\
             take your servants to your room upstairs\
             and make your prayers there to Athena,\
             daughter of great Zeus who bears the aegis.\
   [1020] She may rescue him from death. Don\'92t bother                         \
             that old man with still more troubles.\
             I don\'92t think the family of Arcesius\
             is so completely hated by the gods,\
             that one of them cannot still somehow\
             protect this high-roofed home and its estates,\
             so rich and far away.\'94\
             \
             Eurycleia spoke.\
             What she said eased the sorrow in Penelope,\
             whose eyes stopped weeping. She left to bathe herself,\
             put fresh clothing on her body, and went away,  \
   [1030] taking her female servants to her room upstairs.                                                       \
             She placed some grains of barley in a basket\
             and then prayed to Athena:\
             \
             \'93O untiring child\
             of aegis-bearing Zeus, hear my prayer.\
             If resourceful Odysseus in his home\
             ever burned a sacrifice to you\'97\
             plump cattle thighs or sheep\'97recall that now,\
             I pray. Save my dear son and guard him well\
             from those suitors and their murderous pride.\'94\
             \
             With these words, Penelope raised a sacred cry,\
             and the goddess heard her prayer.\
             \
   [1040] But the suitors                              \
             were still carousing in those shadowy halls.\
             One overbearing youth would say something like this:\
             \
             \'93Ah ha, our queen with many suitors                                                                               \
             is really getting ready for the marriage,\
             knowing nothing of the preparations\
             for the killing of her son.\'94\
             \
             That\'92s the sort of thing\
             any one of them would say, in his ignorance\
             of how things finally would end. Then Antinous\
             addressed them all and said:\
             \
             \'93Noble lords,\
   [1050] you must not speak out so intemperately\'97                              \
             no more talk like that. Someone may report it,\
             especially to those inside the house.\
             Come now, let\'92s get up quietly and work\
             to carry out that plan which all our hearts\
             responded to with such delight.\'94\
             \
             After saying this, Antinous picked out his men,\
             twenty of the best. They went down to the shore\
             and dragged a swift black ship into deep water.                                                                    \
             They set the mast in place, carried sails on board,\
   [1060] and fitted oars into their leather rowing loops,                                                      \
             all in due order, then spread the white sail out.\
             Their proud attendants brought up weapons for them.\
             They moored the ship quite near the shore, then disembarked\
             and ate a meal there, waiting until evening fell.\
             \
             Wise Penelope lay there in her upstairs room,\
             taking no food\'97she would not eat or drink\'97\
             worrying if her fine son could avoid being killed,\
             or if those arrogant suitors would slaughter him.                                                                 \
             Just as a lion grows tense, overcome with fear,   \
   [1070] when encircled by a crowd of crafty hunters,                                                           \
             that\'92s how her mind was working then, as sweet sleep\
             came over her. Then she lay back and got some rest,\
             and all her limbs relaxed.\
             \
             But then Athena,\
             goddess with the glittering eyes, thought of something else.\
             She made a phantom shape, exactly like a woman,\
             Iphthime, daughter of the brave Icarius\
             and wife to Eumelus, who lived in Pherae.\
             Athena sent this shape to lord Odysseus\'92 home,\
             while Penelope was in distress and grieving,                                                                            \
   [1080] to tell her she should end her tears and sorrow.                                                    \
             The phantom passed through the thong which held the bolt\
             and went into Penelope\'92s room. Standing there\
             above her head, it spoke to her, saying:\
             \
             \'93Penelope,\
             is your heart anxious as you lie asleep?\
             It shouldn\'92t be. The gods who live at ease\
             will not bring you distress and suffering\'97\
             your son will still get home. For he\'92s someone\
             who\'92s never been offensive to the gods.\'94\
             \
             Wise Penelope remained in her sweet sleep\
   [1090] beside the gate of dreams. But she replied and said:                                         \
             \
             \'93Sister, why have you come here? Up to now                                                              \
             you haven\'92t visited\'97your home\'92s so far away.\
             You tell me to end my cries and suffering,\
             all the pains which grieve my mind and heart.\
             But I\'92ve already lost my noble husband,\
             that lion-hearted man, whose qualities\
             made him preeminent among Danaans\
             in all sorts of ways\'97a courageous warrior,\
             whose fame is widely known throughout wide Greece\
   [1100] and middle Argos. And now the son I love                               \
             has set off in a hollow ship\'97poor child\'97\
             with no idea of how men struggle on\
             or conduct themselves in meetings. That\'92s why\
             I grieve for him much more than for my husband.\
             He makes me tremble\'97I am so afraid                                                                              \
             he\'92ll run into troubles with those people\
             in the land he\'92s visiting or at sea.\
             Many enemies are now devising schemes\
             to hurt him, in their eagerness to kill him\
   [1110] before he gets back to his native land.\'94                                                             \
             \
             The dim phantom then answered Penelope:\
             \
             \'93Be brave. And do not let your mind and heart\
             succumb to fear too much. He has with him\
             the sort of guide whom other men have prayed\
             to stand beside them, and she has power\'97\
             yes, Pallas Athena. While you\'92ve been grieving,\
             she\'92s taken pity on you. She\'92s the one\
             who sent me here to tell you this.\'94\
             \
             Wise Penelope                                         \
             then spoke out in reply:\
             \
             \'93If you\'92re indeed a god \
   [1120] and have listened to that goddess when she speaks,                             \
             then tell me news of that ill-fated man.\
             I\'92m begging you. Is Odysseus still alive\
             and looking at the sunlight, or is he dead,\
             already down in Hades\'92 home?\'94\
             \
             The faint image then answered Penelope and said:\
             \
             \'93No, no. I cannot talk of him in any detail\
             and tell you whether he\'92s alive or dead.\
             It\'92s a bad thing to chatter like the wind.\'94\
             \
             Once it said this, the phantom slipped away,\
   [1130] through the door bolt out into a breath of wind.                                                  \
             The daughter of Icarius woke from her sleep,\
             her heart encouraged that so clear a dream                                                                               \
             had raced towards her in the dead of night.\
             \
             The suitors then embarked and sailed away\
             on their trip across the water, minds fully bent\
             on slaughtering Telemachus. Out at sea,\
             half way between Ithaca and rugged Samos,\
             there\'92s the rocky island Asteris. It\'92s small,\
             but ships can moor there in a place with openings \
   [1140] in both directions. The Achaeans waited there                                 \
             and set up their ambush for Telemachus.}