{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf460
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural\qc

\f0\fs24 \cf0 BOOK FIVE\
          Odysseus Leaves Calypso\'92s Island and Reaches Phaeacia\
\
[The assembled gods decide to send Hermes to tell Calypso she must let Odysseus go home; Calypso welcomes Hermes on her island, hears Zeus\'92s orders; Calypso helps Odysseus construct a raft; Odysseus sets sail from Calypso\'92s island and gets within sight of Phaeacia; Poseidon sends a storm which destroys the raft; Odysseus gets help from the sea goddess Leucothea; Odysseus has trouble finding a place to come ashore, finds a river mouth, climbs ashore, and falls asleep in the woods near the river.]\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural
\cf0           \
          As Dawn stirred from her bed beside lord Tithonus,\
          bringing light to eternal gods and mortal men,\
          the gods were sitting in assembly, among them\
          high-thundering Zeus, whose power is supreme.\
          Athena was reminding them of all the stories                                        \
          of Odysseus\'92s troubles\'97she was concerned for him                                        \
          as he passed his days in nymph Calypso\'92s home.\
          \
          \'93Father Zeus and you other blessed gods\
          who live forever, let no sceptred king\
  [10] be prudent, kind, or gentle from now on,                                                      \
          or think about his fate. Let him instead\
          always be cruel and treat men viciously,                                                                         \
          since no one now has any memory\
          of lord Odysseus, who ruled his people\
          and was a gentle father. Now he lies\
          suffering extreme distress on that island\
          where nymph Calypso lives. She keeps him there\
          by force, and he\'92s unable to sail off\
          and get back to his native land\'97he lacks\
  [20] a ship with oars and has no companions                                   \
          to send him out across the sea\'92s broad back.\
          And now some men are setting out to kill\
          the son he loves, as he sails home. The boy\
          has gone to gather news about his father,\
          off to sacred Pylos and holy Sparta.\'94                                                                                    \
          \
          Cloud-gatherer Zeus then answered her and said:\
          \
          \'93My child,\
          what a speech has slipped the barrier of your teeth!\
          Did you not organize this plan yourself,\
          so that Odysseus, once he made it home,\
  [30] could take out his revenge against those men?                                          \
          As for Telemachus, you should use your skill\
          to get him to his native land unharmed\'97\
          that\'92s well within your power. The suitors\
          will sail back in their ship without success.\'94\
          \
          Zeus spoke and then instructed Hermes, his dear son:\
          \
          \'93Hermes, since in every other matter\
          you are our herald, tell the fair-haired nymph                                                           \
          my firm decision\'97the brave Odysseus\
          is to get back home. He\'92ll get no guidance\
  [40] from the gods or mortal men, but sail off                                 \
          on a raft of wood well lashed together.\
          He\'92ll suffer hardships, but in twenty days\
          he\'92ll reach the fertile land of Scheria,\
          the territory of the Phaeacians,\
          people closely connected to the gods.\
          They will honour him with all their hearts,\
          as if he were divine, then send him off,\
          back in a ship to his dear native land.\
          They\'92ll give him many gifts of bronze and gold\
  [50] and clothing, too, a greater hoard of goods                              \
          than Odysseus could have ever won at Troy,\
          even if he\'92d got back safe and sound                                                                                   \
          with his share of the loot they passed around.      \
          That\'92s how Fate decrees he\'92ll see his friends\
          and reach his high-roofed house and native land.\'94\
          \
          Zeus finished speaking. The killer of Argus,\
          his messenger, obeyed. At once he laced up\
          on his feet those lovely golden ageless sandals\
          which carry him as fast as stormy blasts of wind\
  [60] across the ocean seas and boundless tracts of land.                                           \
          He took the wand with which he puts to sleep\
          or wakes the eyes of any man he chooses.\
          With this in hand, the mighty killer of Argus\
          flew off\'97speeding high above Pieria,\
          then leaping from the upper sky down to the sea.                                                              \
          Across the waves he raced, just like a cormorant,\
          which hunts for fish down in the perilous gulfs\
          of the restless sea, soaking his thick plumage\
          in the brine\'97that how Hermes rode the crowded waves.\
  [70] But when he reached the distant island, he rose up,                                         \
          out of the violet sea, and moved on shore,\
          until he reached the massive cave, where Calypso,\
          the fair-haired nymph, had her home. He found her there,\
          a huge fire blazing in her hearth\'97from far away\
          the smell of split cedar and burning sandal wood                                                               \
          spread across the island. With her lovely voice\
          Calypso sang inside the cave, as she moved\
          back and forth before her loom\'97she was weaving\
          with a golden shuttle. All around her cave\
  [80] trees were in bloom, alder and sweet-smelling cypress,                                \
          and poplar, too, with long-winged birds nesting there\'97\
          owls, hawks, and chattering sea crows, who spend their time\
          out on the water. A garden vine, fully ripe\
          and rich with grapes, trailed through the hollow cave.\
          From four fountains, close to each other in a row,                                                             \
          clear water flowed in various directions,\
          and all around soft meadows spread out in full bloom\
          with violets and parsley. Even a god,\
          who lives forever, coming there, would be amazed\
  [90] to see it, and his heart would fill with pleasure.                                                     \
          The killer of Argus, god\'92s messenger, stood there,\
          marvelling at the sight. But once his spirit\
          had contemplated all these things with wonder,\
          he went inside the spacious cave. And Calypso,\
          that lovely goddess, when she saw him face to face,\
          was not ignorant of who he was, for the gods\
          are not unknown to one another, even though\
          the home of some immortal might be far away.                                                                   \
          But Hermes did not find Odysseus in the cave\'97\
[100] that great-hearted man sat crying on the shore,                                                   \
          just as before, breaking his heart with tears and groans,\
          full of sorrow, as he looked out on the restless sea\
          and wept. Calypso invited Hermes to sit down\
          on a bright shining chair. Then the lovely goddess\
          questioned him:\
          \
          \'93Hermes, honoured and welcome guest,\
          why have you come here with your golden wand?\
          You haven\'92t been a visitor before.\
          Tell me what\'92s on your mind. My heart desires\
          to carry out what you request, if I can,\
[110] and if it\'92s something fated to be done.                                                                         \
          But bear with me now, so I can show you\
          the hospitality I give my guests.\'94\
          \
          After this speech, Calypso set out a table\
          laden with ambrosia, then mixed red nectar.\
          And so the messenger god, killer of Argus,\
          ate and drank. When his meal was over and the food\
          had comforted his heart, Hermes gave his answer,\
          speaking to Calypso with these words:\
          \
          \'93You\'92re a goddess,\
          and you\'92re asking me, a god, why I\'92ve come.\
[120] Since you\'92ve questioned me, I\'92ll tell you the truth.                                \
          Zeus told me to come here against my will.\
          For who would volunteer to race across                                                                            \
          that huge expanse of sea\'97so immense\
          it cannot be described? There\'92s no city there\
          of mortal men who offer sacrifice\
          or choice gifts to the gods. But there\'92s no way\
          that any other god can override\
          or shun the will of aegis-bearing Zeus.\
          He says that you have here with you a man\
[130] more unfortunate than all the other ones                                 \
          who fought nine years round Priam\'92s city,\
          which in the tenth year they destroyed and left\
          to get back home. But on that voyage back\
          they sinned against Athena, and she sent\
          tall waves and dangerous winds against them.\
          All his other noble comrades perished,                                                                             \
          but winds and waves still carried him ahead\
          and brought him here. Now Zeus is ordering you\
          to send him off as soon as possible.\
[140] For it is not ordained that he will die                                        \
          far from his friends. Instead his fate decrees\
          he\'92ll see his family and still make it home\
          to his own high-roofed house and native land.\'94\
          \
          Hermes finished. Calypso, the lovely goddess,\
          trembled as she spoke to him\'97her words had wings:\
          \
          \'93The gods are harsh and far too jealous\'97\
          more so than others. They are unhappy\
          if goddesses make mortal men their partners\
          and take them to bed for sex. That\'92s how it was                                                      \
[150] when rose-fingered Dawn wanted Orion\'97                              \
          you gods that live at ease were jealous of her,\
          until golden-throned sacred Artemis\
          came to Ortygia and murdered him\
          with her gentle arrows.1 In the same way,\
          when fair-haired Demeter was overcome\
          with passion and had sex with Iasion\
          in a thrice-ploughed fallow field, soon enough\
          Zeus heard of it and annihilated him\
          by throwing down his dazzling lightning bolt.\
[160] Now once again you gods are envious,                                                              \
          because a mortal man lives here with me.\
          I saved him when he was all by himself,                                                                          \
          riding his ship\'92s keel\'97his swift ship smashed\
          by a blow from Zeus\'92 flaming lightning,\
          while in the middle of the wine-dark sea,\
          where all his other brave companions died.\
          Wind and waves brought him here. This is a man\
          I cherished and looked after, and I said\
          I\'92d make him ageless and immortal\
[170] for all days to come. But since there\'92s no way                           \
          another god can override the plans\
          of aegis-bearing Zeus or cancel them,\
          let him be off across the restless seas,\
          if Zeus has so commanded and decreed.\
          But I\'92ll have no part of escorting him                                                                                 \
          away from here\'97I have no ships with oars\
          nor any crew to take him on his way\
          across the broad back of the sea. But still,\
          I can make sincere suggestions to him\
[180] and keep nothing hidden, so he can reach                                \
          his native land and get back safe and sound.\'94\
          \
          Then the killer of Argus, Zeus\'92 messenger,\
          said to Calypso:\
          \
          \'93Yes, send him away.\
          Think of Zeus\'92s rage. He may get angry\
          and make things hard for you in days to come.\'94\
          \
          The killer of Argus, the gods\'92 great messenger,\
          said these words and left. The regal nymph Calypso,\
          once she\'92d heard Zeus\'92s message, went off to find                                                             \
          great-hearted Odysseus. She found him by the shore,\
[190] sitting down there, with his eyes always full of tears,                                       \
          because his sweet life was passing while he mourned\
          for his return. The nymph no longer gave him joy.\
          At night he slept beside her in the hollow cave,\
          as he was forced to do\'97not of his own free will,\
          though she was keen enough. But in the daylight hours\
          he\'92d sit down on the rocks along the beach, his heart\
          straining with tears and groans and sorrow. He\'92d look out,\
          through his tears, over the restless sea. Moving up,\
          close to him, the lovely goddess spoke:\
          \
          \'93Poor man,                                          \
[200] spend no more time in sorrow on this island                            \
          or waste your life away. My heart agrees\'97\
          the time has come for me to send you off.\
          So come now, cut long timbers with an axe,\
          and make a raft, a large one. Build a deck\
          high up on it, so it can carry you\
          across the misty sea. I\'92ll provision it\
          with as much food and water and red wine\
          as you will need to satisfy your wants.\
          I\'92ll give you clothes and send a favouring wind\
[210] blowing from your stern, so you may reach                              \
          your own native land unharmed, if the gods\
          are willing, the ones who hold wide heaven,\
          whose will and force are mightier than my own.\'94                                                  \
          \
          Calypso finished. Lord Odysseus trembled,\
          then spoke to her\'97his words had wings:\
          \
          \'93Goddess,\
          in all this you\'92re planning something different.\
          You\'92re not sending me back home, when you tell me\
          to get across that huge gulf of the sea\
          and in a raft\'97a harsh and dangerous trip.\
[220] Not even swift well-balanced ships get through                        \
          when they enjoy fair winds from Zeus. Besides,\
          without your consent I\'92d never board a raft,\
          not unless you, goddess, would undertake\
          to swear a mighty oath on my behalf\
          you\'92ll not come up with other devious plans\
          to injure me.\'94\
          \
          Odysseus finished speaking.                                               \
          Calypso, the lovely goddess, smiled, caressed him,\
          and then replied by saying:\
          \
          \'93You\'92re a cunning man,\
          with no lack of wit\'97to consider\
[230] giving such a speech. But let the earth                                      \
          stand witness, and wide heaven above,\
          and the flowing waters of the river Styx\'97\
          the mightiest and most terrible oath\
          the blessed gods can make\'97I will not plan\
          any other injury against you. No.\
          I\'92ll think of things and give advice, as if\
          I was scheming for my own advantage,\
          if ever I should be in such distress.\
          For my mind is just, and inside my chest                                                                       \
[240] there is no iron heart\'97it feels pity,                                          \
          just like your own.\'94\
          \
          The beautiful goddess\
          finished speaking, then quickly led him from the place.\
          He followed in her footsteps. Man and goddess\
          reached the hollow cave. He sat down in the chair\
          Hermes had just risen from, and the nymph set down\
          all kinds of food to eat and drink, the sort of things\
          mortal human beings consume.2 Then she took a seat\
          facing god-like Odysseus, and her servants\
          placed ambrosia and nectar right beside her.\
[250] So the two of them reached out to take the fine food                               \
          spread out before them. When they\'92d had their fill\
          of food and drink, beautiful divine Calypso\
          was the first to speak:\
          \
          \'93Nobly born son of Laertes,\
          resourceful Odysseus, so you now wish\
          to get back to your own dear native land\
          without delay? In spite of everything,\
          I wish you well. If your heart recognized\
          how much distress Fate has in store for you\
          before you reach your homeland, you\'92d stay here\
[260] and keep this home with me. You\'92d never die,                                          \
          even though you yearned to see your wife,\
          the one you always long for every day.                                                                             \
          I can boast that I\'92m no worse than her\
          in how I look or bear myself\'97it\'92s not right\
          for mortal women to compete with gods\
          in form and beauty.\'94\
          \
          Resourceful Odysseus\
          then answered her and said:\
          \
          \'93Mighty goddess,\
          do not be angry with me over this.\
          I myself know very well Penelope,\
[270] although intelligent, is not your match                                     \
          to look at, not in stature or in beauty.\
          But she\'92s a human being and you\'92re a god.\
          You\'92ll never die or age. But still I wish,\
          each and every day to get back home,                                                                               \
          to see the day when I return. And so,\
          even if out there on the wine-dark sea\
          some god breaks me apart, I will go on\'97\
          the heart here in my chest is quite prepared\
          to bear affliction. I\'92ve already had\
[280] so many troubles, and I\'92ve worked so hard                               \
          through waves and warfare. Let what\'92s yet to come\
          be added in with those.\'94\
          \
          Odysseus finished.\
          Then the sun went down, and it grew dark. The two of them\
          went inside the inner chamber of the hollow cave\
          and lay down beside each other to make love.\
          \
          As soon as rose-fingered early Dawn appeared,\
          Odysseus quickly put on a cloak and tunic,\
          and the nymph dressed in a long white shining robe,                                                    \
          a lovely lightly woven dress. Around her waist\
[290] she fixed a gorgeous golden belt and placed a veil                           \
          high on her head. Then she organized her plans\
          so brave Odysseus could leave. She handed him\
          a massive axe, well suited to his grip and made\
          of two-edged bronze. It had a finely crafted shaft\
          of handsome olive wood. Next she provided him\
          a polished adze. Then she led him on a path\
          down to the edges of the island, where tall trees grew,\
          alder, poplar, and pine that reached the upper sky,\
          well-seasoned, dried-out wood, which could keep him afloat.                               \
[300] Once she\'92d pointed out to him where the large trees grew,                       \
          Calypso, the lovely goddess, went back home.\
          Odysseus then began to cut the timber. His work\
          proceeded quickly. He cut down twenty trees,\
          used his bronze axe to trim and deftly smooth them,\
          then lined them up. The fair goddess Calypso\
          then brought him augers, so he bored each timber,\
          fastened them to one another, and tightened them\
          with pins and binding. Odysseus made the raft\
          as wide as the broad floor of a cargo ship\
[310] traced out by someone very skilled in carpentry.                                                         \
          Then he worked to add the deck, attaching it\
          onto the close-set timbers, then finished it\
          with extended gunwales. Next he set up a mast\
          with a yard arm fastened to it and then made\
          a steering oar to guide the raft. From stem to stern\
          he wove a fence of willow reeds reinforced\
          with wood to guard him from the waves. Calypso,\
          the beautiful goddess, brought him woven cloth\
          to make a sail\'97which he did very skilfully.\
[320] On it he tied bracing ropes, sheets, and halyards,                                                       \
          and then levered the raft down to the shining sea.\
          \
          By the fourth day he had completed all this work.\
          So on the fifth beautiful Calypso bathed him,\
          dressed him in sweet-smelling clothes, and sent him\
          from the island. The goddess stowed on board the raft\
          a sack full of dark wine and another large one,\
          full of water, and a bag of food, in which she put\
          many tasty things for him to eat. She sent him\
          a warm and gentle wind, and lord Odysseus\
[330] was happy as he set his sails to catch the breeze.                                                  \
          He sat beside the steering oar and used his skill                                                                  \
          to steer the raft. Sleep did not fall upon his eyelids\
          as he watched the constellations\'97the Pleiades,\
          the late-setting Bootes, and the Great Bear,\
          which men call the Wain, always turning in one place,\
          keeping watch over Orion\'97the only star\
          that never takes a bath in Ocean.3 Calypso,\
          the lovely goddess, had told him to keep this star\
          on his left as he moved across the sea. He sailed\
[340] for ten days on the water, then for seven more,                                                   \
          and on the eighteenth day some shadowy hills appeared,\
          where the land of the Phaeacians, like a shield                                                                     \
          riding on the misty sea, lay very close to him.\
          \
          But at that moment, the mighty Earthshaker,\
          returning from the Ethiopians, saw him\
          from the distant mountains of the Solymi.\
          Poseidon watched Odysseus sailing on the sea,\
          and his spirit grew enraged. He shook his head\
          and spoke to his own heart:\
          \
          \'93Something\'92s wrong!\
[350] The gods must have changed what they were planning            \
          for Odysseus, while I\'92ve been far away\
          among the Ethiopians. For now\
          he\'92s hard by the land of the Phaeacians,\
          where he\'92ll escape the great extremes of sorrow\
          which have come over him\'97so Fate ordains.\
          But still, even now I think I\'92ll push him                                                                            \
          so he gets his fill of troubles.\'94\
          \
          Poseidon spoke.\
          Then he drove the clouds together, seized his trident,\
          and shook up the sea. He brought on stormy blasts\
[360] from every kind of wind, concealing land and sea                           \
          with clouds, so darkness fell from heaven. East Wind\
          clashed with South Wind, while West Wind, raging in a storm,\
          smashed into North Wind, born in the upper sky,\
          as it pushed a massive wave. Odysseus\'92 knees gave way,\
          his spirit fell, and in great distress he spoke aloud,\
          addressing his great heart:\
          \
          \'93I\'92ve got such a wretched fate!\
          How is all this going to end up for me?                                                                            \
          I\'92m afraid everything the goddess said\
          was true, when she claimed that out at sea,\
[370] before I got back to my native land,                                                                     \
          I\'92d have my fill of troubles. And now\
          all that is taking place\'97just look how Zeus\
          has covered the wide sky with clouds, stirred up\
          the sea with stormy blasts from different winds\
          swooping down on me. My sheer destruction\
          is now beyond all doubt. O those Danaans,\
          three and four times blessed, who died back then\
          in spacious Troy, while doing a favour\
          for the sons of Atreus!4 How I wish\
[380] I\'92d died as well and met my Fate that day                                 \
          when companies of Trojans hurled at me\
          their bronze-tipped spears, in the fighting there                                                     \
          around the corpse of Peleus\'92s dead son.5\
          Then I\'92d have had my funeral rites,\
          and Achaeans would have made me famous.\
          But now I\'92m fated to be overwhelmed\
          and die a pitiful death.\'94\
          \
          As he said this,\
          a massive wave charged at him with tremendous force,\
          swirled round the raft, then from high above crashed down.\
[390] Odysseus let go his grip on the steering oar                                     \
          and fell out, a long way from the raft. The fierce gusts\
          of howling winds snapped the mast off in the middle.\
          The sail and yard arm dropped down into the sea,\
          some distance off. For many moments he was held\
          under the water\'97he found it difficult\
          to rise above the power of that mighty wave,                                                                          \
          because the clothes he\'92d got from beautiful Calypso\
          dragged him down. But finally he reached the surface,\
          spitting tart salt water from his mouth, as it streamed down\
[400] from off his head. But even so, though badly shaken,                                     \
          he did not forget about the raft. Through the waves\
          he swam, grabbed hold, and crouched down in the middle,\
          trying to escape destructive Fate. The huge wave\
          carried him along its course this way and that.\
          Just as in autumn North Wind sweeps the thistledown\
          along the plain, and the tufts bunch up together,\
          that\'92s how the winds then drove his raft to and fro                                                           \
          across the sea. Sometimes South Wind would toss it\
          over to North Wind to carry. At other times,\
[410] East Wind would let West Wind lead on the chase.                                           \
          Then Ino with the lovely ankles noticed him\'97\
          Cadmus\'92 daughter, once a mortal being with human speech,\
          but now, deep in the sea, she was Leucothea\
          and had her share of recognition from the gods.6\
          She felt pity for Odysseus as he suffered\
          in his wandering. She rose up from the water,\
          like a sea gull on the wing, perched on the raft,\
          and spoke to him, saying:\
          \
          \'93You poor wretch,\
          why do you put Earthshaker Poseidon\
[420] in such a furious temper, so that he                                          \
          keeps making all this trouble for you?                                                                               \
          No matter what he wants, he won\'92t kill you.\
          It seems to me you\'92ve got a clever mind,\
          so do just what I say. Take off these clothes,\
          and leave the raft. Drift with the winds.\
          But paddle with your hands, and try to reach\
          the land of the Phaeacians, where Fate says\
          you will be rescued. Here, take this veil\'97\
          it\'92s from the gods\'97and tie it round your chest.\
[430] Then there\'92s no fear you\'92ll suffer anything                               \
          or die. But when your hand can grab the shore,\
          then take it off and throw it far from land\
          into the wine-dark sea. Then turn away.\'94                                                                      \
          \
          The goddess spoke and handed him the veil. Then she left,\
          diving like a sea bird down in the heaving sea.\
          A dark wave swallowed her. Then lord Odysseus,\
          who had endured so much, considered what to do.\
          In his distress he addressed his own brave heart:\
          \
          \'93I\'92m in trouble. I hope none of the gods\
[440] is weaving dangers for me once again                                      \
          with this advice of hers to leave the raft.\
          Well, I won\'92t follow what she says\'97not yet.\
          For I can see with my own eyes how far off\
          that land is where she said I would be saved.\
          So what I\'92ll do is what seems best to me\'97                                                                    \
          as long as these planks hold firm in place,\
          I\'92ll stay here and bear whatever troubles come,\
          but once the waves have smashed my raft apart,\
          I\'92ll swim for it. There is no better way.\'94\
          \
[450] As his mind and heart were thinking about this,                                                  \
          Earthshaker Poseidon set in motion\
          a monstrous, menacing, and terrifying wave,\
          arching high above his head, and drove it at him.\
          Just as a storm wind scatters dry straw in a heap,\
          blowing pieces here and there in all directions\'97\
          that\'92s how that wave split the long planks on the raft.\
          But while straddling a board, as if astride a horse,                                                             \
          Odysseus stripped away the clothing he\'92d received\
          from fair Calypso. He wound the veil across his chest,\
[460] and then, with arms outstretched, fell face first in the sea,                        \
          trying to swim. The mighty Shaker of the Earth\
          saw him, shook his head, then spoke to his own heart:\
          \
          \'93So now, after suffering so much anguish,\
          keep wandering on the sea until you meet\
          a people raised by Zeus. Still, I don\'92t think\
          you\'92ll be laughing at the troubles still in store.\'94\
          \
          With these words Poseidon lashed his fine-maned horses                                         \
          and left for Aegae where he has his splendid home.\
          \
          Then Athena, Zeus\'92s daughter, thought up something new.\
[470] She blocked the paths of every wind but one                                   \
          and ordered all of them to stop and check their force,\
          then roused the swift North Wind and broke the waves in front,\
          so divinely born Odysseus might yet meet\
          the people of Phaeacia, who love the oar,\
          avoiding death and Fates. So for two days and nights\
          he floated on the ocean waves, his heart filled\
          with many thoughts of death. But when fair-haired Dawn                                        \
          gave rise at last to the third day, the wind died down,\
          the sea grew calm and still. He was lifted up\
[480] by a large swell, and as he quickly looked ahead,                                                \
          Odysseus saw the land close by. Just as children\
          rejoice to see life in a father who lies sick,\
          in savage pain through a long wasting illness,\
          with a cruel god afflicting him, and then,\
          to their delight, the gods release him from disease,\
          that\'92s how Odysseus rejoiced when he could see\
          the land and forests. He swam on ahead, eager\
          to set foot on the shore. But when he\'92d come in close,\
          as far as man\'92s voice carries when he shouts,                                                                          \
[490] he heard the crashing of the sea against the rocks\'97                        \
          huge waves with a dreadful roar smashing on dry land\
          and foaming spray concealing everything\'97\
          there were no harbours fit for ships to ride or coves,\
          but jutting headlands, rocks, and cliffs\'97at that point\
          Odysseus felt his knees and spirit give way,\
          and in despair he spoke to his great heart:\
          \
          \'93What\'92s this?\
          Zeus has given me a glimpse of land,\
          just when I\'92d lost hope, and I\'92ve made my way\
          cutting across this gulf, but I can\'92t find\
[500] a place where I can leave this cold grey sea.                                                         \
          There\'92s an outer rim of jagged boulders\
          where waves come crashing with a roar on them.\
          The rock face rises sheer, the water there\
          is deep, so there\'92s no way to gain a foothold\
          and escape destruction. If I try to land,\
          a huge wave may pick me up and smash me\
          on those protruding rocks, and my attempt\
          would be quite useless. But if I keep swimming\
          and hope I\'92ll find a sloping beach somewhere\
[510] or havens from the sea, then I\'92m afraid                                    \
          the stormy winds will grab me once again\
          and carry me, for all my heavy groaning,                                                                      \
          across the fish-filled seas, or else some god\
          may set some monstrous creature of the sea\
          against me\'97illustrious Amphitrite\
          raises many beasts like that. I know well\
          how great Earthshaker has been enraged at me.\'94\
          \
          As he debated in his mind and heart like this,\
          a huge wave carried him toward the rocky shore.\
[520] His skin would have been ripped and all his bones smashed up,         \
          but the goddess with the gleaming eyes, Athena,\
          put a thought inside his mind. As he surged ahead,\
          he grabbed a rock with both his hands and held on,\
          groaning, until that giant wave had passed him by.\
          So he escaped. But as the wave flowed back once more,                                             \
          it charged, struck, and flung him out to sea. Just as\
          an octopus is dragged out of its den with pebbles\
          clinging to its suckers, that\'92s how his skin was scraped\
          from his strong hands against the rocks, as that great wave\
[530] engulfed him. And then unfortunate Odysseus                                \
          would have perished, something not ordained by Fate,\
          if bright-eyed Athena had not given him advice.\
          Moving from the surf where it pounded on the shore,\
          he swam out to sea, but kept looking at the land,\
          hoping to come across a sloping beach somewhere                                                          \
          or a haven from the sea. He kept swimming on\
          and reached the mouth of a fair-flowing river,\
          which seemed to him the finest place to go onshore.\
          There were no rocks, and it was sheltered from the wind.\
[540] Odysseus recognized the river as it flowed                                       \
          and prayed to him deep in his heart:\
          \
          \'93Hear me, my lord,\
          whoever you may be. I\'92ve come to you,\
          the answer to my many prayers, fleeing\
          Poseidon\'92s punishment from the deep sea.\
          A man who visits as a wanderer\
          commands respect, even with deathless gods\'97\
          just as I\'92ve now reached your stream and knees,\
          after suffering so much. So pity me,\
          my lord\'97I claim to be your suppliant.\'94                                                                           \
          \
[550] Odysseus spoke. At once the god held back his flow,                                       \
          checked the waves, calmed the water up ahead of him,\
          and brought him safely to the river mouth. Both knees bent,\
          he let his strong hands fall\'97the sea had crushed his spirit.\
          All his skin was swollen, sea water flowed in streams\
          up in his mouth and nose. He lay there breathless,\
          without a word, hardly moving\'97quite overcome\
          with terrible exhaustion. But when he revived\
          and spirit moved back into his heart, he untied\
          the veil the goddess gave him and let the river                                                                      \
[560] take it as it flowed out to the sea. A great wave                                \
          carried it downstream, and then without delay\
          Ino\'92s friendly hands retrieved it. But Odysseus\
          turned from the river, sank down in the rushes,\
          and kissed life-giving earth. Then in his anxiety,\
          he spoke to his great heart:\
          \
          \'93What now? What\'92s next for me?\
          How will I end up? If I stay right here\
          all through the wretched night, with my eye on\
          the river bed, I fear the bitter frost\
          and freshly fallen dew will both combine\
[570] to overcome me when, weak as I am,                                                                 \
          my spirit\'92s breath grows faint\'97the river wind\
          blows cold in early morning. But if I climb                                                                   \
          uphill into shady woods and lie down\
          in some thick bushes and so rid myself\
          of cold and weariness, sweet sleep may come\
          and overpower me, and then, I fear,\
          I may become some wild beast\'92s prey, its prize.\'94\
          \
          As he thought it through, the best thing seemed to be\
          to move up to the woods. Close by the water\
[580] he found a place with a wide view. So he crept                                 \
          underneath two bushes growing from one stem\'97\
          one was an olive tree, the other a wild thorn.\
          Wet winds would not be strong enough ever to blow\
          through both of these, nor could the bright sun\'92s rays shine in,\
          and rain would never penetrate\'97they grew so thick,                                                    \
          all intertwined with one another. Under these\
          Odysseus crawled and immediately gathered up\
          with his fine hands a spacious bed\'97fallen leaves\
          were all around, enough to cover two or three\
[590] in winter time, however bad the weather.                                                                   \
          When resourceful lord Odysseus noticed that,\
          he was happy and lay down in the middle,\
          heaping fallen leaves on top of him. Just as\
          someone on a distant farm without a neighbour\
          hides a torch underneath black embers, and thus saves\
          a spark of fire, so he won\'92t need to kindle it                                                                            \
          from somewhere else, that\'92s how Odysseus spread the leaves\
          to cover him. Athena then poured sleep onto his eyes,\
[600] covering his eyelids, so he could find relief, a quick respite from his exhausting troubles.                                                           }