{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf460
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural\qc

\f0\fs24 \cf0 BOOK SIX\
Odysseus and Nausicaa\
          \
[Athena visits Nausicaa while she is sleeping in the palace and tells her to take the washing to the river; Nausicaa asks her father to provide a wagon and mules; Nausicaa goes with her attendants to the river, washes the clothes, and wakes up Odysseus; Odysseus emerges naked and talks to Nausicaa; she agrees to help him; Odysseus bathes, dresses, and eats; they set off for the city and reach the outskirts; Odysseus prays to Athena.]\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural
\cf0           \
          While much-enduring lord Odysseus slept there,\
          overcome with weariness and sleep, Athena\
          went to the land of the Phaeacians, to their city.\
          Many years ago these people used to live\
          in wide Hypereia, close to the Cyclopes,\
          proud arrogant men and much more powerful,\
          who kept on robbing them. So god-like Nausithous\
          had taken them away and led them off to settle\
          in Scheria, far from any men who have to work\
  [10] to earn their daily bread. He\'92d had them build a wall                       \
          around the city, put up homes, raise temples\
          to the gods, and portion out the land for farming.                                                            \
          But some time past his fate had struck him and he\'92d gone\
          down to the house of Hades. Now Alcinous was king,\
          a man to whom the gods had granted wisdom.\
          Athena, bright-eyed goddess, went to this man\'92s home,\
          to arrange a journey home for brave Odysseus.\
          She moved into a wonderfully furnished room\
          where a young girl slept, one like immortal goddesses\
  [20] in form and loveliness. She was Nausicaa,                                                                  \
          daughter of great-hearted Alcinous. Close by her,\
          beside each door post, her two attendants slept,\
          girls whose beauty had been given by the Graces.1\
          The shining doors were closed. Like a gust of wind,                                                         \
          Athena slipped over to the young girl\'92s bedside,\
          stood there above her head, and then spoke to her.\
          Her appearance changed to look like Dymas\'92 daughter\'97\
          he was a man famous for the ships he owned.\
          His daughter was the same age as Nausicaa,\
  [30] whose heart was well disposed to her. In that form,                                          \
          bright-eyed Athena spoke out and said:\
          \
          \'93Nausicaa,\
          how did your mother bear a girl so careless?                                                               \
          Your splendid clothes are lying here uncared for.\
          And your wedding day is not so far away,\
          when you must dress up in expensive robes\
          and give them to your wedding escort, too.\
          You know it\'92s things like these that help to make\
          a noble reputation among men\
          and please your honoured mother and father.\
  [40] Come, at daybreak let\'92s wash out the clothing.                                          \
          I\'92ll go as well to help you, so with all speed\
          you can prepare yourself\'97it won\'92t be long\
          before you, too, are a married woman.\
          You\'92ve already got men from this country\
          asking for your hand in marriage, the finest\
          in all Phaeacia, from whom you yourself\
          derive your lineage. So come on now,\
          ask your noble father to provide you,\
          this morning early, a wagon and some mules,\
  [50] so you can carry the bright coverlets,                                                                  \
          the robes and sashes. That would be better\
          than going on foot, because the washing tubs\
          stand some distance from the town.\'94                                                                                  \
          \
          With these words,\
          bright-eyed Athena went back to Olympus,\
          where, men say, gods\'92 home endures forever,\
          undisturbed by winds and never drenched with rain\
          or covered by the snow\'97instead high overhead\
          the air is always bright. There blessed gods are happy\
          every day. That\'92s where the bright-eyed goddess went\
  [60] once she\'92d finished speaking to Nausicaa.                                                                   \
          As soon as Dawn on her splendid throne arrived\
          and woke fair-robed Nausicaa, she was curious\
          about her dream. So she went through the house                                                                \
          to tell her dear father and her mother. She found them\
          in the house\'97her mother sitting by the hearth\
          with her servant women, spinning purple yarn.\
          She came across her father as he was going out\
          to meet some well-known kings in an assembly\'97\
          he\'92d been summoned by Phaeacian noblemen.\
  [70] Nausicaa went to stand close by her father                                       \
          and then spoke to him:\
          \
          \'93Dear father, can you prepare\
          a high wagon with sturdy wheels for me,\
          so I can carry my fine clothing out\
          and wash it in the river? It\'92s lying here\
          all dirty. And it\'92s appropriate for you\
          to wear fresh garments on your person\
          when you\'92re with our leading men in council.                                                           \
          You have five dear sons living in your home\'97\
          two are married, but three are now young men\
  [80] still unattached, and they always require                                  \
          fresh-washed clothing when they go out dancing.\
          All these things I have to think about.\'94\
          Nausicaa said these words because she felt ashamed\
          to remind her father of  her own happy thoughts\
          of getting married. But he understood all that\
          and answered, saying:\
          \
          \'93I have no objection,\
          my child, to providing mules for you,\
          or any other things. Go on your way.\
          Slaves will get a four-wheeled wagon ready\
          with a high box framed on top.\'94                                                                                               \
          \
  [90] Once he\'92d said this,              \
          he called out to his slaves, and they did what he ordered.\
          They prepared a smooth-running wagon made for mules,\
          led up the animals, and then yoked them to it.\
          Nausicaa brought her fine clothing from her room.\
          She placed it in the polished wagon bed. Her mother\
          loaded on a box full of all sorts of tasty food.\
          She put in delicacies, too, and poured some wine\
          into a goat skin. The girl climbed on the wagon.\
          Her mother also gave her some smooth olive oil\
[100] in a golden flask, so she and her attendants                                     \
          could use it when they bathed. Then Nausicaa                                                                       \
          took the bright reins and whip and lashed the mules ahead.\
          With a clatter of hooves, the mules moved quickly off,\
          carrying clothing and the girl, not by herself,\
          for her attendants went with her as well.\
          When they reached the stream of the fair-flowing river,\
          where the washing tubs were always standing ready,\
          full of fresh water flowing up from underneath\
          and spilling over, enough to clean one\'92s clothing,\
[110] even garments really soiled, they took the mules                             \
          out of their wagon harnesses, then drove them\
          along the banks beside the swirling river,\
          to let them graze on clover sweet as honey.                                                                              \
          The girls picked up the clothing from the wagon,\
          carried it in their arms down to the murky water,\
          and trampled it inside the washing trenches,\
          each one trying to work more quickly than the others.\
          Once they\'92d washed the clothes and cleaned off all the stains,\
          they laid the garments out in rows along the sea shore,\
[120] right where the waves which beat upon the coast                             \
          had washed the pebbles clean. Once they had bathed themselves\
          and rubbed their bodies well with oil, they ate a meal\
          beside the river mouth, waiting for the clothes to dry\
          in the sun\'92s warm rays. When they\'92d enjoyed their food,\
          the girl and her attendants threw their head scarves off                                              \
          to play catch with a ball, and white-armed Nausicaa\
          led them in song. Just as when archer Artemis\
          moves across the mountains, along lofty ridges\
          of Erymanthus or Taygetus, full of joy,\
[130] as she pursues wild boars and swiftly running deer,                                          \
          with nymphs attending on her, daughters of Zeus,\
          who bears the aegis, taking pleasure in the hunt,\
          and Leto\'92s heart rejoices, while Artemis\
          holds her head and eyebrows high above them all,\
          so recognizing her is easy, though all of them\
          are beautiful\'97that\'92s how that unmarried girl\
          stood out then from her attendants.\
          \
          But when the girl                                               \
          was going to harness up the mules and start to fold\
          the splendid clothes to make the journey homeward,\
[140] Athena, bright-eyed goddess, thought of something else,                            \
          so that Odysseus might wake up and then could see\
          the lovely girl, who would conduct him to the city\
          of Phaeacian men. So when the princess threw the ball\
          at one of those attendants with her, she missed the girl\
          and tossed it in the deep and swirling river.\
          They gave a piercing cry which woke up lord Odysseus.\
          So he sat up, thinking in his heart and mind:\
          \'93Here\'92s trouble! In this country I have reached,\
          what are the people like? Are they violent\
[150] and wild, without a sense of justice?                                                                              \
          Or are they kind to strangers? In their minds\
          do they fear the gods? A young woman\'92s shout\
          rang out around me\'97nymphs who live along\
          steep mountain peaks and by the river springs\
          and grassy meadows. Could I somehow be\
          near men with human speech? Come on then,\
          I\'92m going to try to find out for myself.\'94\
          With these words, lord Odysseus crept out from the thicket.\
          With his strong hands, he broke off from thick bushes \
[160] a leafy branch to hold across his body and conceal                          \
          his sexual organs. He emerged, moving just like\
          a mountain lion which relies on its own strength\'97                                                          \
          though hammered by the rain and wind, it creeps ahead,\
          its two eyes burning, coming in among the herd\
          of sheep or cattle, or stalking a wild deer\'97\
          his belly tells him to move in against the flocks,\
          even within a well-built farm. That\'92s how Odysseus\
          was coming out to meet those fair-haired girls,\
          though he was stark naked. He was in great distress,\
[170] but, caked with brine, he was a fearful sight to them,                                     \
          and they ran off in fear and crouched down here and there\
          among the jutting dunes of sand. The only one\
          to stand her ground was Alcinous\'92 daughter.\
          For Athena had instilled her heart with courage                                                                   \
          and taken from her arms and legs all sense of fear.\
          So she stood there facing up to him. Odysseus\
          wondered whether he should grasp the lovely girl\
          around her knees and plead his case or keep his distance,\
          remaining where he was, and with gentle words\
[180] entreat her to inform him where the city was                                   \
          and provide him clothing. As he thought about it,\
          it seem to him a better plan to stand apart\
          and appeal to her with words of reassurance,\
          in case her heart grew angry when he clasped her knee.\
          So he quickly used his cunning and spoke to her\
          with soothing language:\
          \
          \'93O divine queen,\
          I come here as a suppliant to you.\
          Are you a goddess or a mortal being?\
          If you\'92re one of the gods who hold wide heaven,                                                     \
[190] then I think you most resemble Artemis,                                                        \
          daughter of great Zeus, in your loveliness,\
          your stature, and your shape. If you\'92re human,\
          one of those mortals living on the earth,\
          your father and noble mother are thrice-blest,\
          and thrice-blest your brothers, too. In their hearts\
          they must glow with pleasure for you always,\
          when they see a child like you moving up\
          into the dance. But the happiest heart,\
          more so than all the rest, belongs to him\
[200] who with his wedding gifts will lead you home.                                        \
          These eyes of mine have never gazed upon                                                                  \
          anyone like you\'97either man or woman.\
          As I observe you, I\'92m gripped with wonder.\
          In Delos once I saw something like this\'97\
          a youthful palm-tree shoot growing up\
          beside Apollo\'92s altar. I\'92d gone there,\
          with many others in my company,\
          on the trip where Fate had planned for me\
          so many troubles. But when I saw that,\
[210] my heart looked on a long time quite astonished\'97                 \
          I\'92d never noticed such a lovely tree\
          springing from the earth. And, lady, that\'92s how\
          I am amazed at you, lost in wonder,\
          and am very much afraid to clasp your knee.\
          But great distress has overtaken me.\
          Yesterday, my twentieth day afloat,                                                                                      \
          I escaped the wine-dark sea. Before that,\
          waves and swift-driving storm winds carried me\
          from Ogygia island. And now a god\
[220] has tossed me on shore here, so that somehow                         \
          I\'92ll suffer trouble in this place as well.\
          For I don\'92t think my problems will end now.\
          Before that day, there are still many more\
          the gods will bring about. But, divine queen,\
          have pity. You\'92re the first one I\'92ve approached,\
          after going through so much grief. I don\'92t know\
          any other people, none of those who hold\
          the city and its land. Show me the town.\
          Give me some rag to throw around myself,\
[230] perhaps some wrapping you had for the clothes                       \
          when you came here. As for you, may gods grant                                                  \
          all your heart desires\'97may they give you\
          a husband, home, and mutual harmony,\
          a noble gift\'97for there is nothing better\
          or a stronger bond than when man and wife\
          live in a home sharing each other\'92s thoughts.\
          That brings such pain upon their enemies\
          and such delight to those who wish them well.\
          They know that themselves, more so than anyone.\'94\
[240] White-armed Nausicaa then answered him and said:                                      \
          \'93Stranger, you don\'92t seem to be a wicked man,\
          or foolish. Olympian Zeus himself\
          gives happiness to bad and worthy men,\
          each one receiving just what Zeus desires.\
          So he has given you your share, I think.\
          Nonetheless, you still must bear your lot.                                                                       \
          But now you\'92ve reached our land and city,\
          you\'92ll not lack clothes or any other thing\
          we owe a hard-pressed suppliant we meet.\
[250] I\'92ll show the town to you, and I\'92ll tell you                                 \
          what our country\'92s called\'97the Phaeacians\
          own this city and this land. As for me,\
          I am the daughter of brave Alcinous\'97\
          Phaeacian power and strength depend on him.\'94\
          Nausicaa finished speaking. Then she called out\
          to her fair-haired attendants:\
          \
          \'93Stand up, you girls,\
          Have you run off because you\'92ve seen a man?\
          Surely you don\'92t think he\'92s an enemy?                                                                              \
          For there\'92s no man now alive or yet to be\
[260] who\'92ll reach this land of the Phaeacians                                    \
          bringing war, because gods truly love us,\
          and we live far off in the surging sea,\
          the most remote of people. Other men\
          never interact with us. No. So this man\
          is some poor wanderer who\'92s just come here.\
          We must look after him, for every stranger,\
          every beggar, comes from Zeus, and any gift,\
          even something small, is to be cherished.\
          So, my girls, give this stranger food and drink.\
[270] Then bathe him in the river, in a place                                     \
          where there\'92s some shelter from the wind.\'94                                                                  \
          Nausicaa finished. They stood up and called out\
          to one another. Then they took Odysseus aside,\
          to a sheltered spot, following what Nausicaa,\
          daughter of great-hearted Alcinous, had ordered.\
          They set out clothing for him, a cloak and tunic,\
          and gave him the gold flask full of smooth olive oil.\
          They told him to bathe there in the flowing river,\
          but lord Odysseus said to the attendants:\
          \
[280] \'93Would you young ladies move some distance off,                           \
          so I can wash salt water from my shoulders\
          by myself and then rub on the olive oil.\
          It\'92s a long time since oil was on my skin.                                                                        \
          I won\'92t wash myself in front of you,\
          for I\'92m ashamed to stand stark naked\
          in the presence of such fair-haired girls.\'94\
          Once he\'92d said this, the two attendants moved away\
          and told Nausicaa. Then lord Odysseus\
          washed his body in the river, rinsing off the salt\
[290] covering his broad shoulders and his back,                                                                \
          and wiping the encrusted brine out of his hair.\
          When he\'92d washed himself all over and rubbed on oil,\
          he put on clothes the unmarried girl had given him.\
          Then Athena, Zeus\'92s daughter, made him appear\
          taller and stronger, and on his head she curled                                                                     \
          his hair\'97it flowed up like a flowering hyacinth.\
          Just as a skilful workman sets a layer of gold\
          on top of silver, a craftsman who has been taught\
          all sorts of arts by Athena and Hephaestus,\
[300] and what he creates is truly beautiful,                                                                             \
          that\'92s how the goddess graced his head and shoulders.                         \
          Then Odysseus went to sit some distance off,\
          beside the shore, glowing with charm and beauty.\
          Nausicaa gazed at him in admiration,\
          then spoke to her fair-haired attendants, saying:\
          \'93Listen to me, my white-armed followers\'97\
          I have something to say. This man here\
          has not come among god-like Phaeacians\
          against the will of those immortals                                                                                        \
[310] who possess Olympus. Previously I thought                              \
          he was crude and rough, but now he seems\
          like the gods who occupy wide heaven.\
          Would a man like that could be my husband,\
          living here and happy to remain. But come,\
          my girls, offer the stranger food and drink.\'94\
          When Nausicaa had spoken, they heard her words\
          and quickly did what they\'92d been told. They set out\
          food and drink before resourceful lord Odysseus.\
          He ate and drank voraciously\'97many days had passed                                                  \
[320] since he\'92d last tasted food. Then white-armed Nausicaa                  \
          thought of something else. She folded up the clothes,\
          put them in the handsome wagon, harnessed up\
          the strong-hooved mules, and climbed up by herself.\
          She called out to Odysseus, then spoke to him:\
          \'93Get up now, stranger, and go to the city.\
          I\'92ll take you to my wise father\'92s house,\
          where, I tell you, you will get to meet\
          all the finest of Phaeacians. You seem\
          to me to have good sense, so act as follows\'97\
[330] while we are moving through the countryside                          \
          past men\'92s farms, walk fast with my attendants                                                       \
          behind the mules and wagon. I\'92ll lead the way.\
          Then we\'92ll reach the city. A lofty wall\
          runs round it, and there are lovely harbours\
          on both sides\'97each has a narrow entrance,\
          with curving boats drawn up along the road,\
          since each man has a place for his own ship.\
          The assembly ground stands there as well,\
          around the splendid temple to Poseidon,\
[340] built with huge stones set deep within the earth.                                     \
          Here the people tend to their black ships,\
          busy with the gear\'97fixing ropes and sails\
          and shaping tapered oars. The Phaeacians\
          have no use for bow or quiver, but for masts,                                                             \
          boat oars, and well-trimmed ships, in which with joy\
          they cross the grey salt sea. Their talk is crude,\
          and that I would avoid, in case someone\
          insults me later on\'97among the people\
          there are really insolent men, and thus\
[350] one of the nastier types might well say,                                                            \
          if he bumped into us:\
          \
          \'91Who\'92s the man\
          who\'92s following Nausicaa? A stranger\'97\
          he\'92s tall and handsome! Where did she find him?\
          No doubt he\'92ll be her husband. She\'92s brought here\
          some shipwrecked vagrant, a man whose people\
          live far away, for no one dwells near us,\
          or he\'92s some god come down from heaven,                                                     \
          answering those prayers she\'92s always making.\
          She\'92ll have him as her husband all her days.\
[360] It\'92s better that way, even if she went                                 \
          and found herself a man to marry\
          from some other place\'97she has no respect\
          for those Phaeacians, her own countrymen,\
          the many noble men who\'92d marry her.\'92\
          \'93That\'92s what they would say, and their remarks\
          would injure me. But I would do the same\
          to some other girl who acted just like that,\
          who, while her father and her mother lived,\
          against their wishes hung around with men\
[370] before the day she married one in public.                                                      \
          So, stranger, pay attention to what I say,\
          and with all speed you can get my father\
          to arrange an escort for your journey home.                                                               \
          You\'92ll come across a fine grove to Athena\'97\
          it\'92s near the road, a clump of poplar trees.\
          There\'92s a fountain, with meadows all around.\
          My father has a fertile vineyard there,\
          some land, as well, within shouting distance\
          of the town. Sit down there, and wait a while,\
[380] until we move into the city and reach                                       \
          my father\'92s house. When you think we\'92ve had time                     \
          to reach my home, then go in the city\
          of the Phaeacians and inquire about\
          my father\'92s house, great-hearted Alcinous.\
          It\'92s easy to pick out\'97an infant child                                                                                    \
          could lead you to it. For Phaeacians homes\
          are built in a style utterly unlike\
          the palace of heroic Alcinous.\
          Once inside the house and in the courtyard,\
[390] move through the great hall quickly till you reach                    \
          my mother seated at the hearth, in the firelight,\
          against a pillar, spinning purple yarn\'97\
          a marvellous sight. Servants sit behind her.\
          My father\'92s chair is there by the same pillar,\
          where, like a god, he sits and sips his wine.\
          Move past him. Then with your arms embrace                                                          \
          my mother\'92s knees, if you desire to see\
          the joyful day of your return come soon,\
          even though your home is far away.\
[400] If her heart and mind are well-disposed to you,                                       \
          then there is hope you\'92ll see your friends and reach\
          your well-built house and your own native land.\'94\
          Saying this, Nausicaa cracked the shining whip\
          and struck the mules. They quickly left the flowing river,\
          moving briskly forward at a rapid pace.\
          Using her judgment with the whip, she drove on                                                                 \
          so Odysseus and her servants could keep up on foot.\
          Just at sunset, they reached the celebrated grove,\
          sacred to Athena. Lord Odysseus sat down there\
[410] and made a quick prayer to great Zeus\'92 daughter:                                               \
          \'93Hear me, child of aegis-bearing Zeus,\
          unwearied goddess, listen to me now,\
          for you did not respond to me back then,\
          when I was being beaten down at sea\
          and the great Earthshaker destroyed my raft.\
          Grant that I arrive at the Phaeacians\
          as a friend, someone worthy of their pity.\'94\
          So he prayed. And Pallas Athena heard him.\
          But she did not reveal herself to him directly\'97\
[420] she feared her father\'92s brother, who was still furious,                                              \
          and would keep raging against godlike Odysseus\
          until he finally reached his native land.\
}